::::: {.chapter}

## <span class="ch-roman">I.</span> Separation Perfected {title="Separation Perfected"}

> _"But certainly for the present age, which prefers the sign to the thing
> signified, the copy to the original, representation to reality, the appearance
> to the essence… [illusion]{.ix} only is sacred, truth profane. Nay, sacredness
> is held to be enhanced in proportion as truth decreases and illusion
> increases, so that the highest degree of illusion comes to be the highest
> degree of sacredness."_
>
> —[Feuerbach]{.ix data-ix="Feuerbach, Ludwig"}, Preface to the second edition
> of\
> _The Essence of Christianity_

### 1

In post-[industrial societies]{.ix data-ix="industrial society"}
where mass production and mainstream [media]{.ix}
predominate society, life is presented as an immense accumulation of
_[spectacles]{.ix data-ix="spectacle"}_. Everything that was directly
experienced[
  "directly experienced": A life experience in which an individual directly
  participates. For example, acting in a play at a local theatrical festival, or
  as simple as playing a game of soccer with friends. A concrete example of the
  replacement of direct experience with its representation is how the previously
  common practice of hunting for animals which will be cooked and then eaten was
  first replaced with packaged meat bought at a grocery store, has finally given
  way to the proliferation of packaged pre-cooked meals, where the natural
  ingredients have been obfuscated and abstracted into food products.
]{#fn1.1 .fn .ix data-ix="directly lived experience"}
has been replaced with its representation in the form of [images]{.ix}.

### 2

Whereas [directly lived experience]{.ix} is a continuum of emotion and
sensation, the [representational]{.ix data-ix="representation"} life is a stream
of [images]{.ix} detached from their living context.  The original context of
this directly lived reality cannot be reestablished.  Living a representational
life has a _completely [separate]{.ix data-ix="separation"}_, but unified
experience unto itself that exists
purely in thought. As reality is increasingly represented as images to be
experienced by sight alone, eventually a completely _separate
[pseudo-world]{.ix}_ of images emerges—where the "actual" [reality]{.ix} is only represented, but never 
actually experienced; merely performed and eventually
[simulated]{.ix data-ix="simulation"}. The horizon of this representational
reality is one in which individuals merely witness an image of the world in
fully autonomous non-lived lives.[
  "fully autonomous non-lived lives": The original French is <q lang="fr">est le
  mouvement autonome du non-vivant.</q> or "the autonomous movement of the
  non-living." C.f. Hegel, G., Harris, H. & Knox, T., 1979. The same reference
  is later made in [thesis 215](#dead); the full quotation reads: "Need 
  for labor, elevated into this universality, then form on their own account a 
  monstrous system of community and mutual interdependence in a great people; 
  the life of the dead body, that moves itself within itself, one which ebbs 
  and flows in its motion blindly, like the elements, and which requires 
  continual strict dominance and taming like a wild beast."
]{#fn2.1 .fn .fn-l}

### 3

The Spectacle presents itself as a _universal way_ to provide representation of
directly lived reality, the so-called "official language of generalized
[separation]{.ix}". Additionally, it is a separate part of society that
establishes
common-ground between cultures and focuses all attention upon its spectacular
images of representational reality.[
  "spectacular images of representational reality": This stream of images
  includes television, radio, advertising, newsmedia, social media, and devices
  streaming personalized perspectives on reality.
]{#fn3.1 .fn}
The stream of [images]{.ix} provides individuals
with common points of discussion and pseudo-connection.[
  "common points of discussion and pseudo-connection": E.g. the office
  water-cooler discussion "Did you see last night's presidential debate?"; the
  banal talking points that offer no personal connection or relevance, but that
  act as mediator to relate to the spectacle rather than with other individuals.
]{#fn3.2 .fn}
The stream of images
simultaneously connects and separates individuals. The spectacle connects
individuals to itself when oriented around the same topics, and 
[atomizes]{.ix data-ix="atomization"}
individuals into niche interest-groups of one, where they become
[alienated]{.ix data-ix="alienation"} from
all those around them—trapped within an isolated pseudo-reality of
[personalized]{.ix data-ix="personalization"}
information. Ultimately the [spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, as language"}
is the [official language]{.ix} that separates individuals from one another.

### 4

The [spectacle]{.ix} is not merely the apparatus of [media]{.ix}, but the
relations between individuals themselves, as [mediated]{.ix data-ix="mediation"}
by the stream of images that represent their daily lived experience of this
[pseudo-reality]{.ix}.

### 5

The spectacle is not simply an overabundance of the [media]{.ix} in everyday
lived experience. It is an [ideology]{.ix} that has become materialized. This
[ideology-materialized]{.ix data-ix="ideology materialized"} has replaced the
[lived experience]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"} of reality with a
lived experience of a representational pseudo-reality, one accepted as objective
truth.

### 6

The [spectacle]{.ix} is both the product and producer of the contemporary form of
reality. It is not a supplement to, or decoration of reality, but the very heart
of [pseudo-reality]{.ix}.[
  "the very heart of pseudo-reality": C.f. Hegel, G., Wood, A. & Nisbet,
  H., 1991. The complete quotation reads "Religion is the sigh of the oppressed,
  the heart of a heartless world, the spirit of spiritless conditions." The
  original French here is <q lang="fr">Il est le coeur de l'irréalisme de la
  société réelle</q> or directly translated: "It is the heart of the unrealism
  of real society." Debord uses different words to describe a fake reality, here
  choosing <q lang="fr">l'irréalisme</q>/<q>unrealism</q>. I have chosen to
  translate this as "pseudo-reality".
]{#fn6.1 .fn}
It comes in many forms, entertainment, academic discourse, education, news,
[advertisements]{.ix data-ix="advertising"}, politics, dissent, and even common
sense. It is the hegemonic
social culture, a _[model]{.ix data-ix="models"}_ for the prevailing way of
life. The spectacle
[self-validates]{.ix data-ix="self-validation"} its continued existence with
the _continual affirmation_ of its
mode of production. Because it is continually reproduced, it justifies its own
creation and reaffirms its recreation. This guarantees both its _permanent
presence_ and its monopoly on time spent outside the contemporary
[production]{.ix} process.

### 7

Social relationships are categorized into "real" social [practice]{.ix} or an
"[image]{.ix}" of social practice.[
  "real" social practice / an "image" of social practice: To illustrate an
  example. the former may be in-person, face to face relationships between
  individuals _discussing the spectacle_, while the latter may be an image or
  representation of a relationship such as "Liking" selfies of friends on social
  media.
]{#fn7.1 .fn}
Both practices contain the spectacle, distorting these
social activities to make the [reproduction]{.ix} of the spectacle become the
goal of all social activity. The [language]{.ix} of these social activities
consists of _[signs]{.ix}_ of the "ruling production" or the "indicators" of the
most prestigious or popular ways individuals relate to one another. The
creation, recreation, and adoption of these signs is the ultimate goal of this
mode of production.

### 8

One cannot compare the [directly lived experience]{.ix} of reality with the
spectacle because contemporary society and spectacle are one and the same.
Directly lived reality produces and absorbs the spectacle such that directly
lived reality is no longer something separate, it creates a totality in which
reality exists on both sides. As directly lived reality swings as a pendulum
towards the spectacle,[
  "directly lived reality swings as a pendulum towards the spectacle": The
  original French is <q lang="fr">Chaque notion ainsi fixée n'a pour fond que
  son passage dans l'opposé : la réalité surgit dans le spectacle, et le
  spectacle est réel.</q> or as translated by Knabb: "Each of these seemingly
  fixed concepts has no other basis than its transformation into its opposite:
  reality emerges within the spectacle, and the spectacle is real."
]{#fn8.1 .fn}
it finds itself back where it started.

### 9

With a world that is like a pendulum _swinging back and forth_ between directly
lived reality and the spectacle, the true is a moment of the false.

### 10

The concept of "the spectacle" explains many diverse phenomena. The recognition
of the spectacles ability to explain the diversity of this phenomenon is itself
part of the spectacle, as it organizes and
_[validates]{.ix data-ix="self-validating"}_ all social relations
according to [appearances]{.ix}. When studied by itself, the spectacle is the
_affirmation_ that all human relationships are merely an [image]{.ix} of
relationship.[
  "an image of relationship": This is to say, the superficial appearance of a
  relationship, but one devoid of any direct connection between individuals. For
  example, a Facebook or LinkedIn "friend" can be someone you've never met, nor
  even talked to.
]{#fn10.1 .fn}
Any sufficient and total [critique]{.ix} of the spectacle that grasps its
underlying nature reveals it as a complete _[negation]{.ix}_ of life[
  "a complete negation of life": The original French is <q lang="fr">la négation
  visible de la vie</q>. Life in the sense (and used elsewhere) of an
  individual's participation-in, and experience-of directly lived events, as
  opposed to mere spectacing or participation in virtual or vicarious events.
]{#fn10.2 .fn}
that presents an _[appearance]{.ix}_ of life.

### 11

In order to describe the spectacle, it is necessary to artificially separate and
identify inseparable elements. When _analyzing_ the spectacle, it is necessary
to use the [language]{.ix} of the spectacle in that we continue to operate
within the methodological [terrain]{.ix} of the society that is expressed by the
spectacle. The spectacle is both the _zeitgeist_ and the _ultimate goal_ of this
contemporary arrangement of social life. The
[spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, as period"} is the historical period in
which we are caught.

### 12

The spectacle presents itself as always positive, indisputable, and
inaccessible. Because it is always recreating and regenerating itself, and is
beyond dispute (generally accepted as common sense). It says nothing more than
"what appears is good, what is good appears."[
  "what appears is good, what is good appears.": C.f. Hegel, G., Wood, A. &
  Nisbet, H., 1991. The quote is: "What is rational is real, and what is real is
  rational."
]{#fn12.1 .fn}
The passive acceptance it demands is already imposed by its
[one-way dialog]{.ix data-ix="one-way communication"}, a 
monopoly on the presentation of [appearances]{.ix}, which presents reality as it
is, as it must be.

### 13

The fundamentally indisputable, unchanging, and
[frozen]{.ix data-ix="frozen time"} nature of the spectacle
stems from how its means are its ends. It is the sun that never sets over the
empire[
  "the sun that never sets over the empire…": The phrase "the empire on which
  the sun never sets" was applied to the Spanish Empire of the sixteenth century
  and later to the British Empire.
]{#fn13.1 .fn}
of modern passivity. It covers the entire surface of the world and bathes
indefinitely in its own glory. 

### 14

The society of modern industry is not accidentally or superficially spectacular
by nature, it is _fundamentally spectatorist_. The spectacle is the
[image]{.ix data-ix="images"}
of the ruling economy. Its goal is nothing, its development everything.[
  "Its goal is nothing, its development everything": C.f. Bernstein, E., 1911.
  Full quote is "To me that which is generally called the ultimate aim of
  socialism is nothing, but the movement is everything."
]{#fn14.1 .fn}
It has no goal otherwise.

### 15

The [spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, as product"} presents itself as an
endless parade of new products, as a repeating presentation of the systems
[self-validating]{.ix} rationale, and as
an economic system that outputs an increasing multitude of image-objects. The
spectacle is itself the _leading product_ of contemporary society.

### 16

The spectacle is able to subjugate human beings to itself because the economy is
its servant, having already subjugated them. The spectacle is the forcing
function for the development of the economy for its own desires. The spectacle
is a faithful reflection of the things produced opposed to a fictitious
reflection of the objectification of the producers.[
  "a fictitious reflection of the objectification of the producers" The original
  French is <q lang="fr">et l'objectivation infidèle des producteurs.</q> This
  is to say, the spectacle faithfully presents itself whilst it distorts and
  hides the alienation and objectification of the individuals involved.
]{#fn16.1 .fn}

### 17

The result of the [industrial revolution]{.ix} was the dominance of the economy
over all of social life, degrading life from a state of _being_ to a state of
_having_.[
  "degrading life from a state of being to a state of having": C.f. Marx, K. &
  Engels, F., 1988. Full quote: "Private property has made us so stupid and
  partial that an object is only ours when we have it, when it exists for us as
  capital or when it is directly eaten, drunk, worn, inhabited, etc., in short,
  utilized in some way. But private property itself only conceives these various
  forms of possession as means of life, and the life for which they serve as
  means is the life of private property-labor and creation of capital. Thus all
  the physical and mental senses have been replaced by the simple alienation of
  all these senses-the sense of having."
]{#fn17.1 .fn}
The contemporary phase of post-industrial society has again shifted
from a state of _having_ to one of _appearing_. All actual "having" must now
draw its prestige and ultimate utility from appearances. All individual reality
depends on and draws its power from social reality. Individual reality is only
allowed to appear to the extent that it _is not actually real_.

### 18

When [directly lived]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"} reality is
replaced by a reality of representational images,
the images become real[
  "When directly lived reality is replaced by a reality of representational
  images, the images become real…": The original French is <q lang="fr">Là où le
  monde réel se change en simples images, les simples images deviennent des
  êtres réels</q> C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 2002 (Ch. VIII 3a), the full quote
  is: "For one to whom the sensuously perceptible world becomes a mere idea, for
  him mere ideas are transformed into sensuously perceptible beings…"
]{#fn18.1 .fn}
and motivate new desires and hypnotic behaviors. Since
the spectacle provides specific techniques of imagery to represent aspects of
reality, directly lived reality can no longer be understood, appreciated, or
even grasped. These [images]{.ix} correspond to the human sense of
[sight]{.ix data-ix="senses, vision"}, being
the most general way for the spectacle to represent reality. The spectacle cannot be
found by looking for it, nor even by [listening]{.ix data-ix="senses, hearing"}
for it. The spectacle escapes projects to evade it, wherever there is
independent _[representation]{.ix}_, the
spectacle is reconstituted.

### 19

The spectacle is built upon the methodological traditions of
[western philosophy]{.ix data-ix="philosophy, western"},
one that analyses reality in the limited terms of our
[sense of vision]{.ix data-ix="senses, vision"}, and the
continual development of this observation-based form of [rationality]{.ix}.
Therefore, the spectacle inherits the _weakness_ of those philosophical
frameworks. As such, the spectacle transforms
[directly lived]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"} reality into the mere
observation of reality[
  "transforms directly lived reality into the mere observation of reality…": The
  French here is <q lang="fr">Il ne réalise pas la philosophie, il philosophie
  la réalité.</q> Directly translated as "it does not realize philosophy, it
  philosophizes reality". C.f. Marx, K., 1844 "you cannot supersede philosophy
  without realizing it". It is here the spectacle reaches its apogee, the
  complete reification of reality, one in which we have fundamentally mistaken
  the map for its territory.
]{#fn19.1 .fn}
(its image as a substitute for reality). The experience of directly lived
reality has been degraded to a life of
_[speculation]{.ix data-ix="spectating"}_.

### 20

[Religion]{.ix data-ix="religion"} is the trend in which humanity attributes
power and responsibility to a source outside ourselves. Spectacular technology
has not disproved or diminished this trend, it only roots the source of power as
centered upon Earth, recreating the misattribution of [power]{.ix} to
technology, such that even the most basic acts of daily life become abstract and
[alienated]{.ix data-ix="alienation"} from
[directly lived reality]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"}.
[Philosophy]{.ix data-ix="philosophy"}, the act of thinking outside of context,
and the power it entails; together with its [contemplation]{.ix} of a power
separate from humanity prevents it from full [emancipation]{.ix} from
[theology]{.ix}.[
  "full emancipation from theology": In this context, theology is the study of how
  humanity places power in The Other, and thus absolve themselves of
  any responsibility to power.
]{#fn20.1 .fn}
The development of the [spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, development of"}
does not project a false paradise onto the heavens, instead offering the denial
of life on Earth, a false material reality _within ourselves_ but too sacred to
[participate]{.ix data-ix="participation"} in or directly access.

### 21

As long as our [desires]{.ix data-ix="desire"} are socially
[dreamed]{.ix data-ix="dreams"} [pseudo-needs]{.ix}, dreaming will remain
necessary. The [spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, as nightmare"} is the
nightmare of contemporary reality in which the only way to achieve our dreams is
to remain asleep. The spectacle is the Ambien® that maintains that
[sleep]{.ix}.[
  "The spectacle is the Ambien® that maintains that sleep": Original French here
  is <q lang="fr">Le spectacle est le gardien de ce sommeil.</q> or "The
  spectacle is the guardian of that sleep." C.f. Freud, S. & Brill, A., 1994
  (Ch. 5, Section C), which contends that dreams reflect "the wish for sleep"
  and that "dreams are the guardians of sleep." Ambien is a sleep aid sold at
  most pharmacies.
]{#fn21.1 .fn}

### 22

Those in positions of practical [power]{.ix} within contemporary society have
detached themselves from directly lived reality in order to focus on building
practical power in the new empire of the spectacle. This can be explained by
their continued lack of cohesion and the
[contradictions]{.ix data-ix="contradiction"} inherent in the exercise of
that power.[
  "the contradictions inherent in the exercise of that power": C.f. Marx, K. &
  Engels, F., 1998. Full quotation is "But the fact that the secular basis
  detaches itself from itself and establishes itself as an independent realm in
  the clouds can only be explained by the divisions and contradictions within
  this secular basis." This is to say, the ruling classes have a purely
  ideological and oversimplified understanding of reality, and have shifted the
  exercise of power to the falsified realm of the spectacle. This idea is
  explored in depth in the 2016 documentary _HyperNormalisation_: 
  "politicians, financiers and technological utopians, rather than face up to
  the real complexities of the world, retreated. Instead, they constructed a
  simpler version of the world in order to hang on to power." see Curtis,
  A., 2016.
]{#fn22.1 .fn}

### 23

The oldest social [specialization]{.ix} is that of an individual in control of
_[power]{.ix}_.[
  "an individual in control of power": With the development from
  hunter-gatherers to agrarian societies emerged the first specialization: the
  tribal chieftain.
]{#fn23.1 .fn .fn-l}
This specialization is at the root of the spectacle
and acts as the [representative]{.ix data-ix="representation"} and
decision-maker for all other activities in
society. It has banned all other acts of expression unless it is presented by
the spectacle. The most modern specialization is simultaneously the most
ancient.[
  "most modern specialization is simultaneously the most archaic": C.f. Marx,
  K., 2005. Full quotation "[Some] determinations will be shared by the most
  modern epoch and the most ancient."
]{#fn23.2 .fn}

### 24

The spectacle is a self-congratulatory monologue with itself, describing its own
[totalitarian]{.ix data-ix="totalitarianism"} management of the very conditions
of existence. The seemingly objective relationships[
  "The seemingly objective relationships… conceal the fact that these are
  spectacular relationships between classes and people.": C.f. Lukács, G., 1971.
  Full quotation is "The fetishistic illusions enveloping all phenomena in
  capitalist society… conceal the fact that they are the categories of the
  relations of men with each other. Instead they appear as things and the
  relations of things with each other."
]{#fn24.1 .fn}
between [television]{.ix}, radio, [advertisements]{.ix data-ix="advertising"},
and [social media]{.ix} networks to the individuals who consume that media
conceal the fact that these are relationships between people, but appear as
relationships between classes. Humanity continually destroys our irrational yet
actually existing relationships and replaces them with a synthetic copy, a poor
[model]{.ix data-ix="models"} built upon the same deadly irrationalities as
before.[
  "Humanity continually destroys… the same deadly irrationalities as before":
  The original French is <q lang="fr">une seconde nature paraît
  dominer notre environnement de ses lois fatales</q> or "a second nature seems
  to dominate our environment with its fatal laws." C.f. Lukács, G., 1971. Full
  quotation is "a kind of second nature which evolves with exactly the same
  inexorable necessity as was the case earlier on with irrational forces of
  nature."
]{#fn24.2 .fn}
The spectacle is not a natural or inevitable result of
[technological determinism]{.ix}, on the contrary, the spectacle is a
configuration of society that develops technology for its own sake.
Limiting the consideration of the spectacle to its most apparent and superficial
manifestation of the "[mass media]{.ix}", it would seem to be imposed upon
society as a mere technical apparatus. It must be understood that this apparatus
is not neutral and that its development has progressed with respect to the
demands of the spectacle. If the social relationships of contemporary times can
only be facilitated by the mediation of instantaneous communication
technologies, then the administration of these technologies becomes a form of
[power]{.ix}; as such, this
"communication" is a _unilateral
[one-way dialog]{.ix data-ix="one-way communication"}_. The continual
consolidation and accumulation of these technologies results is the accumulation
of this power.[
  "The continual consolidation… results in the accumulation of this power": To
  elaborate: these media conglomerates are not neutral in their relationships to
  people, they are unilateral communications, a one-way dialog that goes from
  the authority of the spectacle to the passive consumer. Communication never
  goes in the reverse direction. The systems that control these mediums control
  the dissemination of a worldview that expands their control of this power.
]{#fn24.3 .fn}
The control of communication in a one-way dialog to the
[passive]{.ix data-ix="passivity"} consumer reflects the
[division of social labor]{.ix data-ix="division of labor"} between the _state_
and the passive citizen.[
  "…the division of social labor between the state and the passive citizen":
  Since this book was first written, the emergence of the Internet and companies
  like Facebook and Google, combined with ubiquitous tracking and machine
  learning, have exploited a new division of labor in society: _the division of
  learning_ under Surveillance Capitalism. This is named and described by Zuboff
  thus: _"Who knows? This is a question about the distribution of knowledge and
  whether one is included or excluded from the opportunity to learn… Who
  decides? This is a question of authority: which people, institutions, or
  processes determine who is included in learning, what they are able to learn,
  and how they are able to act on that knowledge. What is the legitimate basis
  of that authority? Who decides who decides? This is a question about power.
  Whis is the source of power that undergirds the authority to share or withhold
  knowledge?"_ See Zuboff, S., 2019.
]{#fn24.4 .fn}
These divisions are the primary tools of [class domination]{.ix}, and provide
the model for a continual [separation]{.ix} of all social relationships.

### 25

The spectacles primary power is its ability to
_[separate]{.ix data-ix="separation"}_. With the shift to
permanent [agrarian societies]{.ix data-ix="agrarian society"} came the
institutionalization of the social [division of labor]{.ix} in the form of a
permanent [ruling class]{.ix}. This class was
legitimated by a form of thought borrowed from the earlier hunter-gatherer
period, namely the legitimization of [power]{.ix} as bestowed by
[mythical]{.ix data-ix="myth"} power, the
same source from which every subsequent power has camouflaged itself.
[Religion]{.ix data-ix="religion"} justifies the power of those in the ruling
class as sacred, and excuses _their failures_ by corresponding them to the
ontological order of the [heavens]{.ix data-ix="heaven"}. In this
sense, all power bestowed by a social [division of labor]{.ix} has been
spectacular.  The adherence to a belief in this separate and frozen ruling class
was largely due to a general lack of regular, actual daily [participation]{.ix}
in social activity.[
  "The adherence to a belief in this separate ruling class… actual daily
  participation in social activity.": It wasn't until the emergence of cities,
  and the breakdown of serfdom where the peasant class could move into the
  cities, making it possible for the actual daily participation in social life.
]{#fn25.1 .fn}
Contrary to the frozen order bestowed by the heavens, the spectacle promotes a
subset of real social activity,[
  "a subset of real social activity": E.g. protest in its undirected, symbolic,
  and mostly pointless form, the promotion of various forms of non-violence.
]{#fn25.2 .fn}
creating a [false opposition]{.ix data-ix="false dichotomy"} between that which
is socially _possible_ against that which is socially _permitted_. The spectacle
maintains an [unconsciousness]{.ix} about the real changes to the conditions of
daily life. The spectacle is
[self-perpetuating]{.ix data-ix="self-perpetuation"}, it makes its own rules: It
is the contemporary pseudo-God.
The spectacle makes no secret about what it is, namely, a hierarchical power
developing for its own sake. The spectacle drives the [division of labor]{.ix}
into smaller, more [specialized]{.ix data-ix="specialization"} and efficient
tasks until these tasks can be automated by machines. This increasing
specialization creates the efficiencies required to sustain an ever-increasing
[global market]{.ix}. This specialization is so niche that workers cannot see
the context or even the product of their labor, nor can they relate to other
equally specialized workers who attend to similar tasks. Due to this
[alienation]{.ix} between worker and task, worker and worker, and worker to
community, any and all shared sense of purpose are eliminated, without a clear
path to reunite either in [solidarity]{.ix} or [power]{.ix}.

### 26

The acceleration of the [division of labor]{.ix} and the depth of specialization
increases the distance between the producer and the final product. This
simultaneously reduces communication between producers, and eliminates any sense
of accomplishment for the final product. As production processes are specialized
(and aspects of the labor are outsourced to even deeper specialists) the
organizer of labor continues to concentrate control over the entire production
process. The abstract vision and control over the organization of all aspects of
communication between vertical specialists becomes the only task of management.
The measure and goal of this system of [alienation]{.ix} is the
_[proletarianization]{.ix}_ of
the entire world.[
  "the proletarianization of the entire world.": This is to say, the global
  economic system is structured to shift the _monopolization of the
  understanding_ of the productive process to the ruling class, and to alienate
  the working class; first from their labor, the products of their labor, from
  each other, and finally from their community.
]{#fn26.1 .fn}

### 27

The success of division of labor and [automation]{.ix} becomes the primary
goal—the production of the division of labor and automation—is the ends. In what
was previously associated with one's primary work, those whose jobs are on the
leading edge of elimination by automation are finding this time associated with,
and replaced with inactivity. This inactivity, however, is not free from
productive power. The inactivity of the jobless is dependent on the productive
output of the automated systems of production—namely in the form of
[consumption]{.ix}.
The necessity of maximum efficiency rationalizes the existence of a jobless
class, although it is recognized as an uneasy relationship. Individuals are
either directly contributing to the spectacle, or partaking in consuming its
output, but the spectacle has no space for _real_ activity outside this
arrangement. There is no "liberation from labor" or "increase in [leisure]{.ix}"
when at any time an individual is either contributing-to or consuming-from the
system of production. None of the productive energy that was [appropriated by
the spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, appropriation by"} can be regained by the
consumption of the spectacle, it all contributes to the development of the
spectacle.

### 28

An economic system based on divisibility of labor continues to produce more
division in a _vicious cycle of [isolation]{.ix}_. The technology based on the
isolation of concerns creates processes that further isolate. The automobile,
television—technologies[
  "automobile, television… ": Even more applicable is how the smartphone and the
  increasingly personalized nature of internet media contributes to increasingly
  isolating islands of perspective.
]{#fn28.1 .fn}
_selected by the spectacle_ are also the weapons that perpetuate the isolation
that creates our "lonely crowd".[
  "lonely crowd": An allusion to David Riesman's _The Lonely Crowd_, see
  Riesman, D., Glazer, N., Denney, R. & Gitlin, T., 2001.
]{#fn28.1 .fn}
Each technology recreates the basis of the spectacle in ever more concrete
terms.

### 29

The spectacle originates from the [alienation]{.ix} as a result of the division
of labor. The enormous growth of the spectacle expresses the total loss of a
unified perspective shared amongst individuals. All labor, specific techniques,
jobs, and skills are abstracted along with increasing abstraction of the overall
production process to the point where the ideas of _being concrete_ is itself an
_abstraction_. The spectacle _represents itself_ as a perfect image of the
world, a [map]{.ix data-ix="maps"} or [model]{.ix data-ix="models"} of the world
where the world is merely an instance of this map.[
  "The spectacle represents itself as a perfect image of the world… an instance
  of this map": The original French is <q lang="fr">Dans le spectacle, une
  partie du monde se représente devant le monde, et lui est supérieure</q> or
  "It thus tends to divide society into two parts, one of which is superior to
  society." C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1998.
]{#fn29.1 .fn}
Spectators are connected no longer to one another, but solely by a [one-way
relationship]{.ix data-ix="one-way communication"} to the spectacle at the
center. The spectacle connects the
separated, but it connects them only _in their separateness_.[
  "The spectacle connects the separated, but it connects them only in their
  separateness." C.f. Hegel, G., Knox, T. & Kroner, R., 1975. Full quotation "In
  love the separate does still remain, but as something united and no longer as
  something separate;"
]{#fn29.2 .fn}

### 30

The spectacor of the spectacle cannot escape [alienation]{.ix} by unconscious or
conscious thinking. The more they [contemplate]{.ix data-ix="contemplation"}
the spectacle and their place within it, the less they live[
  "The more they contemplate… the less they live": C.f. Marx, K. & Engels,
  F., 1988. Full quotation: "The more the worker exerts himself in his work, the
  more powerful becomes the world of objects that he brings into being over
  against himself, and the poorer his inner world becomes, and the less he
  belongs to himself … The greater his activity, the less he possesses"
]{#fn30.1 .fn}
in [directly experienced reality]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"}.
Conversely, the more they passively accept living in a spectacular reality the
less they understand of real existence and the source of their [desire]{.ix}.
The individual no longer performs their own actions, but sees them performed by
another.[
  "but sees them performed by another" Performance can take the form of
  spectating upon celebrities playing sports, actors enacting love in film, or
  his/her own video game avatar performing their actions vicariously in a
  virtual environment.
]{#fn30.2 .fn}
This is why the spectator no longer feels like they
[participate]{.ix data-ix="participation"} directly in lived reality, and feels
at home nowhere, as the spectacle is everywhere.

### 31

Workers do not produce their own circumstances, they produce an autonomous force
of [alienation]{.ix} independent of themselves.[
  "Workers do not produce their own circumstances… independent of themselves":
  C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1988, full quotation is "The alienation of the
  worker in his product means not only that his labor becomes an object, an
  external existence, but that it exists outside him, independently of him and
  alien to him, and begins to confront him as an autonomous power; that the life
  he has bestowed on the object confronts him as a hostile and alien force."
]{#fn31.1 .fn}
The _success_ of this production, and
the abundance of autonomous [power]{.ix} it generates, is experienced as an
_[abundance of disposession]{.ix data-ix="disposession, abundance of"}.
Under the regime of the spectacle, workers earn wages in order
to buy more products that further dispossess them of [directly lived
experience]{.ix} and instead substitute it with objects that make lived
experience _foreign_ to them. The [spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, as map"}
is a map of this alienated reality, one which is identical to and yet obscures
the real world.[
  "The spectacle is a map of this alienated reality, one which is identical to
  and yet obscures the real world." An allusion to Alfred Korzybski's phrase:
  "The map is not the territory."
]{#fn31.2 .fn}
The map _shows us_ what we've missed in high definition detail.

### 32

The spectacle is a concrete manufacturer of [alienation]{.ix}. Economic
expansion is the product of the increased demand for alienation-production. What
grows with the growth of the economy is the very alienation that exists as its
basis.

### 33

As systems of [production]{.ix data-ix="mass production"}
[specialize]{.ix data-ix="specialization"}, and each worker is more
[alienated]{.ix data-ix="alienation"} from the final product, and while they
produce ever finer details of things in that world, they increasingly find
themselves separated from [participation]{.ix} in daily life. The closer their
life seems to be at their own direction, the more they find themselves alienated
from that life.[
  "The closer their life seems to be at their own direction… alienated from that
  life": This thesis is more relevant with the recent development of "social
  media influencers", those individuals who curate an image of their lives
  online, only to find themselves forced to continually reproduce an image of a
  life they no longer actually live: commodifying themselves in a process that
  alienates themselves from lived experience. Their lives are a labor of
  self-alienation.
]{#fn33.1 .fn}

### 34

The [spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, as capital"} is _capital_ extended to
such an [accumulation]{.ix data-ix="capital, accumulation"} that it becomes a
substitute for reality itself.[
  "a substitute for reality itself": Original French <q lang="fr">qu'il devient
  image.</q> or "where it becomes image."
]{#fn34.1 .fn .fn-l}

:::::
