# II. The Commodity as Spectacle

> “The commodity can be understood in its undistorted essence only when it
> becomes the universal category of society as a whole. Only in this context
> does the reification produced by commodity relations assume decisive
> importance both for the objective evolution of society and for the attitudes
> that people adopt toward it, as it subjugates their consciousness to the forms
> in which this reification finds expression .... As labor is increasingly
> rationalized and mechanized, this subjugation is reinforced by the fact that
> people's activity becomes less and less active and more and more
> contemplative.” —Lukacs, _History and Class Consciousness_

<div class="page-break-after"></div>

## 35

The spectacles basic operation is the incorporation of all the _transient_,
directly experienced activities of human life into itself so as to regenerate
them as commodities in frozen form. The spectacle is a process of the
_inversion_ of the values of daily life into purely abstract values. In these
abstract values we recognize our old enemy _the commodity_, which seems trivial
and obvious at first, but which is full of complexity and metaphysical
subtleties.

> “the inversion of the values of daily life into purely abstract values”: The
> spectacle often presents these commodities in their negative, as products are
> typically advertised by their negative qualities, that which they are not: fat
> free, caffeine free, BPA-free, fair-trade (another way of saying it contains
> less exploitation.)

> “we recognize our old enemy”: c.f. Marx, K., 1856. Full quotation “In the
> signs that bewilder the middle class, the aristocracy and the poor prophets of
> regression, we do recognise our brave friend, Robin Goodfellow…“

> “full of complexity and metaphysical subtleties.”: c.f. Marx, K., Mandel, E.,
> Fowkes, B. & Fernbach, D. 1978 (Vol I, Ch. 1, Section 4). Full quotation: “A
> commodity appears at first glance to be something very trivial and obvious.
> Analysis reveals that it is in reality a very strange thing, abounding in
> metaphysical subtleties and theological abstrusities”

## 36

The transformation of human life into commodities is the apex of commodity
fetishism: a domination of society by "imperceptible as well as perceptible
things”, which is to say, the very objects created by the labor of the working
class. This results in a reality in which life is no longer directly
experienced, but instead represented by images of experience. These images
present themselves as the best possible version of reality.

> "imperceptible as well as perceptible things”: c.f. Marx, K., Mandel, E.,
> Fowkes, B. & Fernbach, D., 1978. Full quotation: “A commodity is therefore a
> mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labor
> appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that
> labor; because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own
> labor is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between
> themselves, but between the products of their labor. This is the reason why
> the products of labor become commodities, social things whose qualities are at
> the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses.”

## 37

The spectacle _presents an image_ of reality in which the commodity dominates
all living experience, this image is understood to be reality itself. The
development of this image, the world of the commodity, is presented plainly as
its rationale directly correlates with individuals _alienation_ from each other
and from the collective product of their labor.

> “the world of the commodity… directly correlates with individuals alienation”:
> The spectacle produces alienation as its predominant product, and alienation
> is the underlying ideology of the spectacle (accepted as common sense by
> society.) As such, the spectacle need not hide its alienating character, and
> can instead _promote_ alienation since its underlying premise has already been
> accepted as truth.

## 38

The spectacle produces an increasing quantity of language that specifically
describes the commodities it promotes and the behaviors it encourages. The
resulting language gradually loses its ability to describe actual reality. This
stems from a system of production that shuns reality. What remains is a large
quantity of language describing its own corrupt production. A language
increasingly capable of describing quantity and unable to describe quality.

> “A language increasingly capable of describing quantity and unable to describe
> quality”: In effect, language is a shattering mirror, increasingly able to
> describe the quantity of its own shards, but with diminishing ability to
> reflect reality.

## 39

The increased quantity of language describing the spectacle lacks any
qualitative aspects, but it is subject to qualitative change. The contemporary
inability of the language to adequately describe the spectacle is itself
evidence of the _enormous development_ of the spectacle. While this development
may not yet be evenly distributed across all localities, this change has
progressed to such an extent that it is verified by the existence of a
globalized marketplace.

> “The increased quantity of language describing the spectacle lacks any
> qualitative aspects”: The dynamic between mythical societies and quality
> versus ideologic societies and quantity is well established in Situationist
> texts, “The myth is based on quality, ideology on quantity” see Vaneigem,
> R., 2010. This is all to say, in the realm of ideology, culture tends to shed
> its content and embrace pure quantity; the less content the media has, the
> more it is repeated (e.g. Retweeted), the more it distracts people from their
> real problems‒a meme based society.

## 40

The _unconscious history_ of human society is the history of the development of
production systems. This history has created the material conditions of society
in the pursuit of survival; it has become the economic basis of all human
activity, and expands these conditions. The expansion of these conditions relies
on the improvement of the underlying economic basis these developments rely on,
thus creating a surplus of survival. When commodity exchange is limited to
exchange between individuals, it will remain for a long time simply individual
small-scale artisanal trade. The ends are still “the production of a craft” in
which its quantitative aspect was limited and largely hidden. When trade
conditions develop to include corporate and state size trades and the
accumulation of capital—the entire economy switches to a process of pure
quantitative development. This transforms craft into commodity, and
craftsmanship into _wage labor_ as all things produced by craft will become
banalized as utility value demands equality and exchangeability across all
commodities produced. The producer is freed from the natural pressure that
demanded the struggle of survival, but they are in no way liberated from their
liberator. The drive for survival is replaced with a drive for labor that
transforms the world of survival into a world of economics. It is at this
juncture where labor is alienated from craft. It is in this falsified
pseudo-state within which human labor has become alienated, all human activity
must remain forever _in the service_ of the production of banal commodities that
contribute to the expansion of this system of production. The abundance of these
commodities, and the relationships of the individuals who both produce and
consume them amounts to nothing more than an _developed form of survival_.

> “the pursuit of survival/obfuscated version of survival”: The Situationists
> made sharp distinctions between mere “survival” and a life of participation
> and direct experience. For more on this distinction see Vaneigem, R., 2010.

> “nothing more than an obfuscated form of survival”: The original French is “ne
> peut être plus que la survie augmentée” or “can be no more than augmented
> survival”, which is to say, a form of survival not in service towards the
> continuation of the experience of life, but the continuation of labor in
> service to the dominant mode of production.

## 41

The domination of the commodity, and the hidden way the world of economics
became the material basis of social life remained misunderstood and unnoticed
because it seemed so familiar. In societies where commodities are scarce, money
is the dominating force that acts as an emissary representing the voice of the
unknown power. It was with the industrial revolution, and the fordist mode of
production that increased the division of labor and began production for the
global market that the commodity became the _colonizing_ principle of social
life. It was at this moment that the political economy established itself as the
dominant science and the science of domination.

> “unnoticed because it seemed so familiar”: c.f. Hegel, G., 2013 (January 31).
> Full quotation is “What is ‘familiarly known’ is not properly known, just for
> the reason that it is ‘familiar’.”

> “the voice of the unknown power”: A concrete example is how money is used as
> leverage over developing nations, in the form of IMF loans, to enact socially
> conservative fiscal policies. These are essentially “unknown powers”, or more
> literally, foreign power exerted over local populations.

## 42

The spectacle is the form society takes when the commodity colonizes _all_ of
social life. The total commodification of social life is not only visible, we no
longer see anything else as all of reality is mediated by our relationships to
commodities. Contemporary economic production extends its dictatorship of the
commodity both broadly and intensively. In the least industrialized places,
imperialism imposed by advanced societies forces the production of a few “star
commodities” upon the colonized. In advanced societies, the alienated production
of abstract commodities becomes secondary to commodity consumption. With the
arrival of the "Information Revolution", alienated consumption has become as
much a duty for the working class as alienated production. The sum total of
industrial production and consumer consumption is then _sold as a complete
commodity_, whose production must continue at all costs—the reproduction of the
spectacle. In order to accomplish this reproduction, the spectacle must be
fragmented, reimagined, and regurgitated in slightly new form for consumption by
individuals who are completely alienated from its production. To serve the
purpose of this alienation, the science of the division of labor (i.e.
specialization) further breaks down the reproduction of the spectacle into
fields such as sociology, psychotechnology, cybernetics, and even semiology;
which oversee the operation of this process.

> “complete commodity”: I interpret this idea as the continual reproduction of
> the spectacle as the total and predominant product of all spectacular labor.

> “regurgitated”: A similar and more relevant term today would be “retweeted”.

## 43

In the primitive phase of capitalism, the political economy only considers the
labor-output of the _worker_, who only needs to be allocated the minimum amount
to sustain his labor contributions, without considering his leisure or humanity.
The ruling class is forced to reconsider this once the production of commodities
reaches an abundance accessible to the general population. At this point, the
ruling class must collaborate with the working class, the worker is no longer
contempted for a lack of labor, but treated with politeness for being a
consumer. In this way, the _commodity takes on a humane_ approach, attending to
the workers "leisure and humanity" for the simple reason that the _political
economy_ must expand from the realm of production to the realm of consumption.
Thus the totality of human existence falls under the regime of the "total denial
of man".

> “the political economy only considers the labor-output… without considering
> his leisure or humanity”: c.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1988. Full quotation:
> “political economy regards the proletarian… as nothing more than a worker. It
> can therefore advance the proposition that, like a horse, he must receive just
> enough to enable him to work. It does not consider him when he is not working,
> as a human being.”

> “total denial of man”: c.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1988. Full quotation:
> “Thus, although political economy, whose principle is labor, appears to
> recognize man, it is in fact nothing more than the denial of man carried to
> its logical conclusion.”

## 44

The spectacle gradually leads individuals to identify personal satisfaction with
survival itself. This transforms satisfaction into a commodity, and
transitively, survival itself becomes a commodity. Survival must always
increase, thus creating a continuation _of lack_. There must never be enough
satisfaction, as satisfaction begets additional lack. The accumulation of
satisfaction becomes a gilded poverty, but it cannot transcend it.

> “personal satisfaction”: Namely, that individuals are materially satisfied
> with the consumer goods and services they desire, having a good job, feeling
> like they aren’t lacking when compared with others in their social circle.

## 45

The technical practice of automation is the vanguard of the economy. Automation
of labor creates a contradiction in the development of society: the technical
apparatus which eliminates manual labor must simultaneously preserve _labor as a
commodity_. If society doesn’t want the time involved in manual labor to
decrease due to automation, then new labor must be created. Those jobs
eliminated by automation will move a reserve army of the unemployed into
“services” and tertiary sectors of the economy. This reserve army acts as the
supply lines for the troops deployed to the production and consumption of the
latest commodities at a time when increasingly excessive advertising campaigns
are necessary to convince individuals to buy increasingly unnecessary
commodities.

> “increasingly unnecessary commodities”: These are the pseudo-necessities of
> daily survival (e.g. an iPhone and a Netflix subscription).

## 46

Exchange value is contingent upon, but exists merely as a proxy for a
commodities use value. Exchange value won its victory over use value, utilizing
the weaponization of capital to create the preconditions necessary to become an
autonomous power beyond use value. Exchange value has taken precedence over use
value, monopolizing all aspects of human satisfaction, thus _controlling a
commodities use_. The process of exchange tightly binds itself to every possible
use, subjugating use to a secondary concern to exchange. Thus, exchange value
becomes the _condottiere_ of use value, waging war for predominance in the
ideology of the market, for its own sake.

> “condottiere”: The Condottiere were the mercenary leaders fighting for the
> wealthy landlords during Renaissance Italy who often ended up taking over the
> states they were fighting for.

## 47

The _use value_ of commodities gradually declines as the spectacle continually
generates new pseudo-necessities. This creates a new form of poverty alongside
the older poverty: a poverty of dispossession from spectacular
pseudo-necessities. As such, wage workers are continually going after an endless
attainment of money as it loses value; a sisyphean task indeed. The worker
labors under the false belief that they must attain more wealth or die, when
survival itself is not actually in danger. This is a sort of blackmail in which
the worker only achieves an illusory wealth, in the form of increased commodity
consumption but no real increase to the quality of their directly lived
experience. The blackmailed are in fear of an illusion, and the commodity is the
materialized illusion as made manifest by the spectacle.

> “survival itself is not actually in danger”: See note to thesis 40 on “the
> pursuit of survival”.

## 48

Exchange value was previously understood as derived from use value. Now,
however, within the inverted reality of the spectacle, use value must be
explicitly (and with great pretension) advertised, as the actual use value of
the commodity has been diminished as its connection to directly lived reality
has been gradually eroded. The commodities relevance has been made obsolete by
the continual development of the market economy. Thus, the pseudo-necessity of
these commodities require pseudo-justifications.

## 49

The spectacle is the complement of money. Money represents the equivalent
exchange of individual goods whose use value cannot be directly compared. The
spectacle is the contemporary development transcending the equivalent exchange
of individual goods towards a representation of the totality of the commodity
market as the equivalent of what the whole of society can be and do. The first
abstraction—money, useful commodities are represented for exchange, yields to
the next layer of abstraction—the spectacle, in which money is _merely gazed
upon_, because all use value has already been exchanged for the first
abstraction. Thus, the spectacle is not only an abstraction of _pseudo-use_
value, but an abstraction of the totality of the system of production of
pseudo-necessities.

> “Thus, the spectacle… production of pseudo-necessities”: I’ve significantly
> reworded the original French in hopes of making Debords argument more clear.
> Original French is “Le spectacle n’est pas seulement le serviteur du
> pseudo-usage, il est déjà en lui-même le pseudo-usage de la vie.” or as
> translated by Nicholson-Smith “The spectacle is not just the servant of
> pseudo­-use­—it is already, in itself, the pseudo­-use of life.” This is to
> say, the consumer is at first separated from their labor through the
> dissatisfied consumption of those pseudo-needs generated by the spectacle.
> Second, the consumer is passively separated from the spectacle by their
> passive gaze upon the spectacle which no longer needs their labor, nor which
> creates products they need, yet produces false necessities they cannot afford.

## 50

When society reaches the level of generalized _economic_ abundance, the result
of all social labor becomes visible, transforming directly lived reality into
the spectacle that is the product of this society's system of production.
Capital is no longer the invisible authority directing the system of production;
as capital accumulates, it spreads to the ends of the earth in the form of
commodities. The entirety of society becomes a portrait of the capital who is
its patron.

> “[capital] spreads to the ends of the earth in the form of commodities.”:
> Capital, the once secret fuel of the system of production, now becomes an
> outward symbol for this system. With the hegemony of globalization, it is now
> possible to travel anywhere in the world and buy products that are the same
> everywhere, each literally printed with the name of the company that created
> it, a dedication to the owners of capital.

## 51

The financialization of the economy emerged victorious as an autonomous power
for its own sake, simultaneously underwriting its own demise. The forces
unleashed by the autonomous power of the financial economy undermine the efforts
of ancient societies put the _material needs_ of humans (e.g. food, clothing,
shelter) at the center of its economy. These needs are replaced by boundless
financial economic growth itself, and society demands the necessity of infinite
growth. The satisfaction of basic human needs is therefore replaced with the
increasing growth of the generation of new pseudo-needs, and the abstract
pseudo-need for this economic arrangement to continue indefinitely. Society then
refocuses its basis to the maintenance and growth of these pseudo-needs at the
expense of authentic needs, a result of a _social unconsciousness_ dependent
upon the economy of pseudo-needs. This is called the “autonomous economy”—the
economy which has shifted from the satisfaction of basic social needs to the
generation of pseudo-needs for its own sake. “Whatever is conscious wears out.
What is unconscious remains unalterable. But once it is freed, does it not fall
to ruin in its turn?”

> “financialization of the economy”: The original French is “La victoire de
> l’économie autonome…” which is “The victory of the autonomous economy…” I’ve
> changed this text to refer to the hegemony of exchange value over use value,
> and how that has produced a self-perpetuating (autonomous) power.

> “Whatever is conscious wears out…“: Quote not found, but attributed to Sigmund
> Freud (1856-1939), the founder of psychoanalysis.

## 52

At the moment society discovers that it depends on the autonomous economy, the
economy depends on society. This formerly secret power, which has developed to
such an extent that it became a visible and autonomous hegemony, it has lost its
power. The economic _Id_ must be replaced by the _I_. The individual, the
subject of the autonomous economy can only emerge from the society that has
organized itself for the production of the individualized pseudo-necessities of
the individual—the general class struggle of each individual to create a
self-determined reality against an economy prepared to create reality for its
own sake. The existence of the autonomous economy is contingent upon the results
of this struggle, the manifestation of which is the product and producer (i.e.
the individual vs economic production) creating the economic and material basis
of history.

> “the economy depends on society”: Society is conscious that its way of life
> depends on the consumption of pseudo-needs lest it collapse.

> “it has lost its power.”: At this point, an autonomous economy is necessary in
> that it has become sovereign, while simultaneously fragile with its dependence
> upon society to continually consume the pseudo-needs it continues to generate,
> a parasitic symbiosis. Once this symbiosis is realized, society must
> internalize the autonomous economy as an intrinsic part of itself, not
> something external to itself, i.e. the economy is society, and society is the
> economy.

> “The economic Id must be replaced by the I.”: An allusion to _The Ego and the
> Id_, See Freud, S. & Strachey, J., 1989. Debord uses détournement with his
> replacement of Ego with “I”, perhaps interpreted as an allusion to the
> emergence of the individual in late-capitalism. The advent of the individual
> as the locus of self-determination, responsibility, and personal choice is a
> result of individuation: a social life determined less by geography,
> ethnicity, race, blood, kin, rank, and religion, and instead focusing on the
> emergence of the human as _individual consumer_ separated from traditional
> norms, meaning, and rules. This life becomes a reality of self-choice to be
> discovered within the context of the global economy rather than a received
> destiny inherited at birth. To service this social shift, there must be an
> equal economic shift that organizes production around the individual, offering
> products and services customized and distributed to meet individualized wants
> and (pseudo-)needs. For more on this topic see Zuboff, S. & Maxmin, J., 2002.

## 53

Under the struggle of capitalism, the worker seeks to abolish all classes and
control the means of production, the consumer desires to understand the nature
of their desire for pseudo-necessities, while desiring the need to be conscious
of this desire; which is to say, a consumer-worker in possession of complete
control over their investments of time into both consumption and production. The
_opposite_ of this is the society of the spectacle, in which the commodity
contemplates itself in a reality of its own making.

> “the commodity contemplates itself in a reality of its own making“: c.f. “He
> contemplates himself in a world that he himself has created.” see Marx, K. &
> Engels, F., 1988. In the spectacle, the product (i.e. the commodity) exists
> for its own sake, external to any human desire, or even society itself,
> organizing reality in order to reproduce itself. This is what Debord means
> with the term the “autonomous economy.”
