## III. Unity & Division Within Appearances

> _"An intense new polemic is unfolding on the philosophical front in this
> country, focusing on the concepts 'one divides into two' and 'two fuse into
> one'. This debate is a struggle between those who are for and those who are
> against the materialist dialectic, a struggle between two conceptions of the
> world: the proletarian conception and the bourgeois conception. Those who
> maintain that 'one divides into two' is the fundamental law of things are on
> the side of the materialist dialectic; those who maintain that the fundamental
> law of things is that 'two fuse into one' are against the materialist
> dialectic. The two sides have drawn a clear line of demarcation between them,
> and their arguments are diametrically opposed. This polemic is a reflection,
> on the ideological level, of the acute and complex class struggle taking place
> in China and in the world."_
>
> —_Red Flag_ (Beijing), September 21, 1964

### 54

The spectacle is simultaneously perceived as united and divided, it builds unity
upon disjunction. The unity of each is contingent upon violent divisions against
the other. When this contradiction is portrayed by the spectacle, its meaning is
reversed: the divisions it portrays are unitary, while the unity it presents is
divided.

> "unity upon disjunction": For example, Americans are unified around the
> concept of a two-party system, whereby Democrats and Republicans only exist in
> order to be opposed to one another. Similarly, when the individual sees wealth
> inequality, they are both disgusted and yet subsumed by the fact that the
> spectacle and society itself would cease to function without it.

### 55

The power struggle between nations internationally, political groups, and
parties within each nation all present themselves as legitimate contestants
opposed to one another as the ones better equipped to manage society—but in fact
are united in the representation and maintenance of the spectacle. In practice
they only offer the continuation of the status quo.

> "parties within each nation": These parties differ only in the style of the
> theatrics they present to a willing audience of spectators. There is no
> distinction between parties when it comes to an alternative to the spectacle.

### 56

The falsified struggle between power groups (despite being theatrical), is real
in that the struggle defines their identities in relation to the spectacular
society. The struggle is to define the dominant characteristics as well as the
form and boundaries of these characteristics in order to construct a cohesive
social identity that stands apart from other identities. The difference between
power groups is determined by their level of economic development or the
contradictory interests of the classes that attempt to construct their social
identities within these groups. The definition of the priorities are decided by
the ruling group, to the detriment of, and in opposition to the minority. This
impacts individuals within the nation as well as those in colonized regions
inside the sphere of influence of the nation. The spectacle presents these
differences as absolutely distinct forms of social organization, but in fact
they are all different styles of localized capitalism that contribute to the
transformation of the world into a globalized field of spectacular capitalism.

> This thesis provides a foundational definition of contemporary identity
> politics.

> "The struggle between power groups…": Nominally a struggle akin to Coke vs
> Pepsi, while both offering mere sugar water.

> "form and boundaries of these characteristics…": As political groups, each
> group attempts to hold a monopoly on particular political opinions, e.g.
> 'we're the party of free public healthcare'. These typically take the form: we
> believe in 'x', we are against 'y', we do not 'z', we are 'a'.

> "different images of capitalism.": e.g. social-democratic capitalism as in
> Europe, authoritarian capitalism as in China and Singapore, even Russia is a
> form of bureaucratic state-controlled totalitarian capitalism.

### 57

Where the economic form of the spectacle hasn't yet dominated undeveloped
colonized countries, they are instead dominated by its theatrical aspects in
media, and the desire for pseudo-necessities: _as the society of the spectacle_.
Cultural developments influence the indigenous ruling classes and limit their
agendas. These cultural dominations, just like the pseudo-necessities that never
satisfy, also provide false models of revolutionary behavior to local
revolutionaries. At the national level, the spectacle presents local and
national specializations, but when looking from a global scale we see a _global
division of spectacular labor_.

> "local and national specializations": e.g. the US has become the worldwide
> police & surveillance force, China the worldwide mass-manufacturer, and India
> a supplier of low-cost knowledge workers.

### 58

The division of spectacular labor primarily reinforces the dominance of the
spectacle as a whole worldwide system, but it primarily focuses on the
development of its most advanced economic sectors. As the spectacle is founded
upon an economy of abundance, the products of that economy tend to dominate the
market within its sphere of influence, despite any local authoritarian police
protections or ideologies that grant the locality the appearance of
independence.

### 59

As the spectacle increasingly produces new products to maintain our attention,
it simultaneously increases the _banalization_ of life, as the limitless choice
of equivalent pseudo-necessities becomes meaningless when all of these objects
fail to satisfy actual necessity. The relics of the class struggle that persist
to the present day are religion and family. These two institutions continue to
tout the value of moral-oppression and conservatism as the solution to the
spectacular excesses of contemporary times. The result of economic abundance is
both an apathetic smugness and a new spectacular rebellion that presents a face
of opposition, but cannot exist without the spectacle it opposes. This is
because dissatisfaction has become a commodity recreated by the spectacle, as
dissatisfaction is the raw material for spectacular society.

> "The relics of the class struggle… family": The family remains to be the
> primary mechanism of transferral of class status, wealth, and power from one
> generation to the next.

> "apathetic smugness": This smugness comes in a few varieties: complacent
> acceptance e.g. "lets just face the facts, we can't change anything!" or
> delusional technocratic reformism: "we can reform capitalism by increasing
> taxation and providing universal basic income!"

> "spectacular rebellion": Recently emergent examples of this type of rebellion
> take the form of religious fundamentalism, terrorism, aimless protest, and
> culture jamming.

### 60

The celebrity is a relatable living representative of the spectacle, each
offering the individual a possible role for the spectacles portrayal of an
_actually lived life_. The individual compensates for a life of narrow
specialization in work and shallow participation in life by identifying with the
celebrities they perceive as living the actually lived life—a life of complete
participation that is both broad and deep. This is an identification with mere
appearances. These celebrities act out various styles of living a single
individual could never live, in a _totally free manner_. The celebrity embodies
the social labor made possible by individual specialists, but that the
specialist can never realize themselves; namely the exercise of _power_, the
enjoyment of leisure, _taking vacations_, making life-changing decisions, and
the consumption of a wide variety of products and services. The celebrity is
able to see and do what the individual is not—participate in both the beginning
and end of the system of production. In the case of the exercise of power, the
national government assumes the form of a celebrity personified, in the case of
the celebrity consumption of leisure, travel, and products that present the star
with the influential power over the experience of life. Ultimately, as these
pseudo-lives are not representative of the totality of human lives, they offer
no actual choice between real lives.

> "participate in both the beginning and end…": The celebrity represents the
> idealized form of life under the spectacle: a life in which the individual
> needs not make decisions that may foreclose other paths through life; but can
> live every life possible with full participation in all aspects of life. This
> is, of course, an image of life presented _as_ life. In witnessing the ideal
> form of living as performed by a celebrity, the individual can themselves feel
> they have lived those lives.

### 61

The celebrity is the opposite of the individual; in assuming the role of the
celebrity, they must accept the public identifying with them and renouncing
their own unique identities. The celebrity is as much an enemy of their own
individuality as to the individuality of others. Each celebrity represents an
aspect of identity to be consumed by the public. In doing so, each of their
unique characteristics is up for sale and is no longer their own. With each
performance, the celebrity outwardly expresses different modes of living and
unique personalities, demonstrating happiness across the entire realm of
consumable lifestyles. These stars, across multiple roles, possess a full range
of admirable human characteristics, the contradictory differences between these
roles is cancelled out by the presentation of excellence in each one. Khrushchev
had to be retroactively promoted to general in order to be given credit for the
battle of Kursk, twenty years later. John F. Kennedy, the great orator, survived
himself when his speech writer Theodore Sorenson penned his own funeral oration
in the same style that created the dead man's public persona. The most admirable
celebrities who personify the spectacle are those who are known for being fake:
they become famous by stooping below anything an acceptable individual would
do—and everyone knows it.

> Khrushchev: In July 1943 near Kursk, the largest tank battle in history pitted
> roughly four thousand Soviet tanks against roughly three thousand German
> tanks. Khrushchev claims to have told Stalin (over his commanding officer)
> "Our defensive positions are solid,... we'll be able to hold our ground." See
> Taubman, W., 2003. He later became the Chairman of the Council of Ministers
> (or premier) of the Soviet Union during the Cold War. After Stalin's death, he
> took power and attempted to end the purges and enact more liberal civil
> policies.

> "The most admirable celebrities… individual would do": C.f. Hegel, G.,
> Hoffmeister, J., Nisbet, H. & Forbes, D., 1975. Full quotation is "Thus, the
> great individuals of history can only be understood within their own context;
> and they are admirable simply because they have made themselves the
> instruments of substantial spirit." Donald J. Trump is a perfect example.

### 62

The spectacle offers an abundance of choice, expressed as loyalties to one side
of a false dichotomy. These loyalties are aligned between competing &
complementary spectacles or the juxtaposition of rules within the spectacle.
These false dichotomies develop into struggles between opposing teams who claim
fierce allegiance to what are otherwise trivial differences. This resurrects
long-dormant racism and regionalism, creating irrational and unnecessary
ontological superiorities. All this sets the stage for trivial
confrontations—sporting events, theatrical elections, and the like. The presence
of abundundant consumption pits the adults against the youth, but "real adults",
those people who are responsible for the destiny of their own lives—are in fact
nowhere to be found. Furthermore, it is not that youth represents change, but
the spectacle is what generates change. It is the new _commodities_ of the
spectacle which are young and changing. At its core, the commodities are what
are directly confronting and replacing one another.

> "loyalty to false dichotomies…": e.g. Democrats vs. Republicans, Coke vs.
> Pepsi; which is to say, alternatives which aren't significantly different.

> "it is not that youth represents change, but the spectacle is what generates
> change.": The difference and confrontation between adult and youth culture is
> merely the difference between the commodities they consume, and their modes of
> consumption. Baby Boomers may tend to consume the spectacular media via
> television, while Millennials consumed the spectacular media by an
> ever-changing sequence of social media apps: MySpace, Facebook, Instagram,
> SnapChat, TicTok, etc. They both consume the spectacular media.

### 63

Beneath the abundance of false dichotomies lies a _unity of poverty_, this is
the struggle for dominance of trivial differences in form, maintained within the
continuation of alienation. In making either choice, individuals become united
in opposition to each other—engaged in a pointless struggle, where only the
spectacle benefits from the continual regeneration of this false opposition
while real contradictions are repressed. The spectacle, at its most abstract
level, presents itself in one of two possible forms: the _concentrated_ form or
the _diffuse_ form. One form comes to the forefront depending on the needs of
the particular stage of poverty it needs to maintain and regenerate. In either
form, it results in the happy harmony around false dichotomies and spectacular
oppositions that generates desolation and horror at the calm center of misery.

> "pointless struggle": Revealing this truth will present the triviality of the
> false opposition—revealing the perception of total agency and free will as a
> superficial free will, one limited to decisions that reinforce the spectacle.
> Behind every choice we perceive to be based upon our free will and responsible
> choice, is a series of prior decisions based on experiences occurring in the
> spectacular society which shapes these experiences and choices in ways that
> are hidden to us. On both sides of spectacular opposition, the spectacle is
> the unity both sides share in their spectacular struggle against each other, a
> struggle that defines their identities (in part).

> "the concentrated form or the diffuse form": Debord has since updated his
> analysis: "In 1967 I distinguished two rival and successive forms of
> spectacular power, the concentrated and the diffuse… The former, presenting an
> ideology concentrated around a dictatorial personality, had accompanied the
> Nazi and Stalinist totalitarian counterrevolutions. The latter, inciting
> wage-earners to apply their freedom of choice to the vast range of new
> commodities now on offer, had represented the Americanisation of the world…
> Since then a third form has been established, through the rational combination
> of these two, and on the basis of a general victory of the form that had shown
> itself stronger: the diffuse. This is the _integrated spectacle_, which has
> since tended to impose itself globally." See Debord, G. & Imrie, M., 1998.

> "happy harmony… calm center of misery": A detournément from Moby Dick, full
> quote is "And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternations
> and affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freely and
> fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yea, serenely revelled in
> dalliance and delight. But even so, amid the tornadoed Atlantic of my being,
> do I myself still for ever centrally disport in mute calm; and while ponderous
> planets of unwaning woe revolve round me, deep down and deep inland there I
> still bathe me in eternal mildness of joy." See Melville, H., 1991 (Ch. 87).

### 64

The concentrated spectacle is primarily associated with bureaucratic capitalism,
but is also the primary form used by both undeveloped economies or advanced
economies to reinforce state power during moments of crisis. Bureaucratic
ownership, which is to say, the ownership of the economy by the bureaucratic
class is also concentrated, in that any individual bureaucrat maintains
ownership only as a member of the bureaucratic community. Commodity production,
while less developed under bureaucratic capitalism, takes on a concentrated
form: the total control of social labor. What it controls in labor it sells back
as exclusive access to the basic means of survival. As such, the dictatorship of
bureaucratic economy cannot leave the exploited classes any margin of choice,
all consumption is carefully chosen by bureaucratic capitalism because it has to
make all choices itself and independently of demand, whether regarding food,
music, or anything else. This amounts to a declaration of war against any
independent choice outside of itself. Whatever is produced must also be
consumed, and nothing outside this system officially exists. The masses cannot
have any margin of choice, because choice ultimately leads to the choice to
destroy bureaucratic capitalism itself. This dictatorship enforces itself with
the exclusive control of the monopoly on violence. The concentrated spectacle
imposes an image of the good which encompasses everything that officially
exists, and typically reflects back upon the work of a single individual, who is
the guarantor of its totalitarian cohesion. Everyone must magically identify
with this star individual or they will disappear. This individual is the master
of his non-consumption, the heroic image that explains and justifies the
absolute exploitation that is in fact primitive accumulation accelerated by
official terrorism. If every Chinese must learn Mao, and thus have to be Mao, it
is because he or she has _nothing else to be_. Wherever the concentrated
spectacle dominates, the police also dominate.

> "bureaucratic capitalism… during moments of crisis": The bureaucratic
> capitalist states use a centralized state power dictated by a supreme leader,
> or a central party with absolute power; for example, the former socialist
> USSR, contemporary China, and North Korea. In Western "neoliberal" or "free
> market" capitalism, absolute powers are given to the ruling class during
> moments of crisis such as natural disasters, popular protests, pandemics, and terrorist
> attacks. This approach to emergency powers was named "Shock Doctrine" by Naomi
> Klein in a book with the same title that describes the use of crisis to push
> through policies that grant additional powers to the state that wouldn't have
> been possible otherwise, see: Klein, N., 2007. Although Western capitalism has
> also become increasingly bureaucratized, when Debord uses the terms "the
> bureaucracy," "bureaucratic capitalism," "bureaucratic class," etc., he is
> referring to the "Communist" parties' evolution into a new type of
> totalitarian bureaucratic ruling class. See also theses 103-113.

### 65

The diffuse spectacle is primarily associated with a society producing an
abundance of commodities, one pursuing the fulfillment of modern capitalism—the
production of commodities for the sake of increasing production, and the need
for constant economic growth. The spectacle is its self-congratulatory
mouthpiece. The major commodities argue with each other in contradictory ways,
promoting conflicting social policies but allowing individuals to identify with
them accordingly. The automobile achieves more efficient travel and empowers
individuals to be autonomous, while destroying the environment and the organic
feel of older cities that operate on a human-scale. This creates a tension
between the desire for organic-feeling old cities and the tourism they attract
at the expense of vehicle ownership. These tensions create a gap of
satisfaction, where the consumer is _unable to satisfy the whole_ of what
society has to offer due to contradictions between its parts. Due to this
contradiction, the whole is absent at every aspect of society.

### 66

Contradictory commodities struggle for themselves, and cannot acknowledge the
others. Each seeks to become predominant as if it existed alone. The spectacle
is the heroic poem of this struggle, one in which the fall of Troy would not
bring about its conclusion. The spectacle doesn't sing of men and their wars,
but of commodities and their passions. It is in this blind struggle that each
commodity, following its passion, in fact unconsciously materializes something
beyond itself: the globalization of the commodity, and thus, the commodification
of the globe. Thus, by a _deception of the commodity_ rationale, the
_individual_ commodity wears itself out in battle, while the commodity-form goes
towards its absolute victory in the war of self-realization.

> "the fall of Troy…": An allusion to Homer's _Iliad_.

> "The spectacle doesn't sing of men and their arms…": C.f. the opening line of
> Virgil's _Aeneid_, full quotation: "Wars and a man I sing…" see Virgil. &
> Fagles, R., 2006.

> "...this blind struggle that each commodity ... self-realization.": C.f.
> Hegel, G., Hoffmeister, J., Nisbet, H. & Forbes, D., 1975. Full quotation:
> "Particular interests contend with one another, and some are destroyed in the
> process. But it is from this very conflict and destruction of particular
> things that the universal emerges. The universal Idea does not itself enter
> into conflict and danger; it remains in the background, untouched and
> unharmed, and sends forth the particular interests of passion to fight and
> wear themselves out in its stead. With what we may call the cunning of reason,
> it sets the passions to work in its service, so that the agents by which it
> gives itself existence must pay the penalty and suffer the loss."

> "the globalization of the commodity, and thus, the commodification of the
> globe": C.f. Engels, F., Marx, K., 1975. Full quotation: "As the world becomes
> philosophical, philosophy also becomes worldly."

> Each commodity independently seeks to create an optimized reality where it is
> the driving force for change within society, adjusting reality according to
> the logic of itself. For example, the automobile restructured the American
> city from a dense assemblage of buildings seen in Boston and New York towards
> the exurban expanse across large tracts of land requiring the highway system
> and buildings set-back from the road with large parking lots which established
> the design for cities like Los Angeles or Las Vegas. According to the logic of
> the car, the world must become either a highway or a parking lot.

### 67

The tension produced between commodities in opposition reduces the satisfaction
of _using_ these abundant commodities. The individual consumer exhibits
religious fervor for having _as commodity_, where having is an end in itself.
All forms of media engage in the promotion of waves of fervor for having these
commodities. A new style of fashion emerges from a movie, nightlife magazines
publicizes new night clubs, which in turn launch new products. The proliferation
of faddish gadgets expresses the fact that when the mass of commodities slides
into absurdity, the absurd itself becomes a star commodity. Gimmicks such as
key-chains, for example, which are no longer bought but are additional gifts
that accompany luxury commodities, or which are traded back and forth as
collectibles in their own right, reflecting a mysterious surrender to the
predominance of the commodity. These commodities are then manufactured
specifically to be collected. Collectors prove their position amongst their
cohort of the faithful by showcasing their obedience to the maintenance of
accumulation, an accumulation of commodity _indulgences_—glorious tokens
exemplifying the commodities physical presence among the most faithful. These
commodified people proudly display the proof of their intimacy with the
commodity. The fetishism of the commodity reaches similar moments of fervent
exaltation as old religious fetishism, with its convulsionary raptures and
miraculous cures. The only usage that remains within this relationship is the
usage of submission to the commodity on the part of the faithful.

> "having the commodity, not for actually using it.": For example,
> "sneakerheads", those who collect hundreds of pairs of expensive sneakers,
> keeping them boxed and in perfect condition, never actually wearing them. The
> satisfaction comes purely from _having_ them; Apple fans will wait in line for
> the latest Apple iPhone, while the phone in their pocket continues to work
> perfectly, and is nearly indistinguishable to the newer model.

> "an accumulation of commodity indulgences-glorious tokens exemplifying the
> commodities physical presence among the faithful": This whole thesis plays on
> associations with classic religious delusions, in this case the "indulgences"
> for forgiveness of sins peddled by the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages and
> the doctrine of the "Real Presence" of Christ in the Eucharist.

### 68

Undoubtedly, the pseudo-needs imposed by contemporary consumerism cannot be
contrasted against any genuine material need or desire that is not itself shaped
by society and history. The economy of commodity abundance represents a total
break from the organic development of social needs. The mechanical accumulation
of commodities unleashes a _limitless demand for pseudo-necessities_ which
overwhelms all material needs and desires. The cumulative power of this
autonomous artificiality ends up _falsifying the needs and desires of directly
lived life_.

> This generates demanded-necessity, where individuals are forced to satisfy
> their pseudo-needs in order to comply with the norms of society. For example,
> a luxury watch becomes a necessity for an executive at Goldman-Sachs. Under
> these conditions, social bonds are as tenuous as having a commodity in common
> with someone else, and social identities are formed around commodity
> ownership: "I'm a Subaru enthusiast", "I'm a Nike Air Jordan collector".

### 69

Society presents an image of general unification around blissful consumption,
yet this is merely _postponing_ consumers awareness of the actual contradictions
until their dissatisfaction with the next commodity. Every new product release
presents itself as the solution to our unified pseudo-need: the desire to
resolve the tension between contradictory commodities. But as with parents
giving seemingly unique first names to their children which end up being given
to virtually all individuals of the same age, the commodities that promise to
solve all consumers dissatisfaction can only be mass-consumed if it has been
mass-produced. This commodity acquires prestige if it is placed at the center of
social life, however briefly, as the ultimate goal of the system of production.
This commodity becomes vulgar as soon as it is brought home, revealing the poor
quality of its mass production, but luckily, by then another product will soon
be released, again promising to resolve the tension between commodities. The new
release demands a new spectacle to tout its potential success.

> "blissful consumption… dissatisfaction": This sequence is institutionalized by
> the system of production as planned obsolescence. Society appears happiest
> when the newest object/product is released. In between, we just wait for the
> new release (occasionally quite literally, some wait in line for the next
> Apple product or Star Wars film.)

### 70

Every commodity expresses its own inability to satisfy both real need and
pseudo-need when the commodity is eventually replaced, proving both the fraud of
satisfaction and the inability of the entire production process to satisfy any
needs. The commodity, continually announcing its excellence in advertising
campaigns, but having failed to satisfy, results in a new commodity which takes
its place—perpetuating and regenerating the process of spectacular production.
Stalin, like any other outmoded commodity, is denounced by the very forces that
originally promoted him. Every _lie_ of advertising is an _admission_ of their
previous lie, revealing the advertiser as someone who knows they produce lies.
Each downfall of a figure of totalitarian power reveals the _deceitful
community_ that unanimously approved of them, which was nothing more than an
assembly of solitudes without illusion.

> Stalin: Joseph Stalin (1878-1953), totalitarian leader of the USSR from the
> late 1920s till his death in 1953. Following his death, his successors, who
> had slavishly followed him for decades, undertook a "de-Stalinization"
> campaign, denouncing the "excesses" of his reign.

### 71

The only constant within the spectacle is change. It is dogmatic only in that it
has no dogma. Nothing remains constant for the spectacle, it constantly shifts
and changes, and yet it presents itself as a permanent condition that has no
historical events and creates an eternal present. This instability is the
spectacle's natural condition, but it is completely contrary to its natural
inclination.

> "Nothing remains constant… it is completely contrary to its natural
> inclination": C.f. Pascal, B. & Ariew, R., 2005. Full quotation: "When we try
> to anchor ourselves to any point, it wavers and leaves us; and if we pursue
> it, it continually eludes our grasp. Nothing stands still for us. This is our
> natural condition, yet it is completely contrary to our inclination."

### 72

The spectacle rests on the class divisions of a capitalist mode of production.
This is hidden by the projection of an image of unity within spectacular
opposition. These class divisions must be maintained to keep the spectacle
going. Capitalism motivates producers to create commodities that promise to
break class distinctions, but this causes a finer stratification between the
lower classes. That which connects individuals who are freed from their local
and national limitations is also what alienates them. New hyper-rationalities
require continually new oversimplifications of reality, creating new
irrationalities of hierarchical exploitation and oppression. That which creates
new abstract powers in society generate its concrete _lack of freedom_.

> "unity within spectacular opposition": The spectacle creates an illusion that
> everyone is involved in the same struggle of Republican vs Democrat, working
> class vs capital; when in reality there are grey areas between the two, as
> well as individuals and groups operating completely outside these false
> dichotomies.
