## IV. The Proletariat as Subject and Representation

> _"Equal right to all the goods and pleasures of this world the destruction of
> all authority, the negation of all moral restraints—in the final analysis,
> these are the aims behind the March 18^th^ insurrection and the charter of the
> fearsome organization that furnished it with an army."_
>
> _Parliamentary Report on the Insurrection of March 18_
>
> > The title of chapter IV is copied from Schopenhauer. See Janaway, C.,
> > Schopenhauer, A., 2010.
>
> > The insurrection of March 18 refers to the Paris Commune, the radical
> > socialist and revolutionary government that ruled Paris from March 18 until
> > May 28^th^ 1871. The national government continued to have authority in
> > rural France during this time, but Paris became briefly independent, with
> > aims of gaining control nationally.
>
> > "the fearsome organization… army": The parliamentary committee of the
> > national government characterized the First International, the Executive
> > Committee of the Commune as fearsome because of their large influence with
> > the National Guard and among soldiers embedded in the army.

### 73

The spectacle began when the bourgeoisie won the economy, and became visible
when the bourgeois politicians put their interests into action within politics.
The real movement that dissolves existing conditions—the continual progression
of capitalism destroying the old way of life in which individuals created goods
as craft, and their relation to the goods as an item with use value, the old
static order crumbled into dust. Everything that had been directly lived has
been relegated to history.

> "The real movement that dissolves existing conditions": C.f. Marx, K. &
> Engels, F., 1998 (Part 1, Ch. 2, Section 5.) Full quotation: "Communism is for
> us not a state of affairs which is to be established, an ideal to which
> reality will have to adjust itself. What we call communism is the real
> movement that is dissolving existing conditions."

> "individuals created goods as craft…": In its place is a thoughtless
> production of items bankrupt of craft, only to be consumed not for its use,
> but in order to satisfy an unsatisfiable pseudo-need.

> "the old static order crumbled into dust.": C.f. Marx, K., Engels, F. & Jones,
> G., 2002 (Part 1). Full quotation: "All that is solid melts into air, all that
> is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face his real conditions
> of life, and his relations with his kind, in a clear and disabused manner."

### 74

When individuals can relate to the products they produce and consume, they
understand it as direct participation in a historically cohesive context
generated by their own labor and struggle, in a clear and disabused manner. This
is the creation of history that has no ends other than whatever final
unconscious metaphysical vision emerges from the procession of events that make
it up. The _subject_ of history can only be the living, participating, and
regeneration of themselves, becoming owner and master of their world—that very
thing which is history, becoming _conscious of their own adventures_.

> "in a clear and disabused manner.": See previous quote from C.f. Marx, K.,
> Engels, F. & Jones, G., 2002 (Part 1).

> "whatever final unconscious metaphysical vision emerges…": One such vision of
> metaphysical history is _The Philosophy of History_, see Hegel, G. & Sibree,
> J., 2004.

### 75

The class struggles of the long _era of revolutions_ that was initiated by the
ascendance of the bourgeoisie, arrived with _historical thought_. This is the
dialectic—a line of reasoning that doesn't conclude at the definition of meaning
of what exists, but aspires to understand the dissolution of everything that
is—and in the process dissolve all separation.

> "the long era of revolutions": The period from approximately 1774 to 1849 in
> which a number of significant revolutionary movements occurred in most of
> Europe and the Americas. The period is noted for the change from absolutist
> monarchies to representative governments with a written constitution, and the
> creation of nation states. Arguably includes the Russian Revolution which
> would extend its end until 1923.

> "dissolve all separation": The role of human labor has shifted from one of
> active manual labor to one of knowledge labor, or even later, pure
> contemplation which is sufficient to call "labor." Within this regime, class
> distinctions seem to dissolve, but will be (in reality) ascribed by ownership
> of power, capital, and signifiers of class membership. The potential for a
> revolution of the proletariat is then to ignore meaning in the contemporary
> moment, and instead to create new meaning through direct actions that seeks to
> eliminate all existing meaning and all forms of alienation. Pure contemplation
> can take an active form such as automation and computation (software
> engineering), and machine learning (data mining and neural-network training.)
> The passive form includes individuals who exchange their time for television,
> social media apps like Instagram, etc; their attention becomes labor in
> itself. For more on this topic see Beller, J., 2006.

### 76

The philosophy of Hegel only examined the _transformation_ of history through
processes (but never examined the process or results of change itself.) He
limited himself to the _mere interpretation_ of the transformation after the
event. His work represents the _philosophical_ culmination of philosophy. He
sought to understand a reality that _generated itself_. His historical thinking
are the justifications that have arrived too late, as the meaning of reality
depends on the historical _completion_ of events—his analysis occurred in
thought only, and as such was able to escape separation. Hegel's paradoxical
intellectual position—the subjugation of the meaning of all reality to the
material conditions and events that have culminated up to that point, while at
the same time revealing that very meaning as the culmination of those
conditions, arises because this great thinker of the bourgeois revolutions of
the 17^th^ and 18^th^ centuries desired a way to _reconcile_ the results of
these revolutions to the specific conditions and events he was attempting to
understand. "Even as a philosophy of the bourgeois revolution, it does not
reflect the entire process of that revolution, but only its concluding phase. It
is thus a philosophy not of the revolution, but of the restoration." (Korsch,
K., 2014) Hegel performed the task of the philosopher—"the glorification of
existing conditions"—for the last time; but what already existed for him could
be nothing less than the entire movement of history. Since his position rested
upon the external position of thought (external to conditions and events), this
position could only be maintained by identifying that thought with the apriori
existence of Spirit—that heroic force that does what it willed and willed what
it has done, that same force whose achievement has created the present.
Philosophy, in the process of being superseded by truly historical thinking, has
thus arrived at the point where it can glorify its world only by denying it,
since it must presuppose that the totality of history to which it credits all
present conditions has already come to its conclusion, and the only court where
truth can be judged has been adjourned.

> Hegel: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831), German philosopher. Although
> it is possible to understand most of _The Society of the Spectacle_ without
> knowing anything about Hegel, some familiarity with his work is useful to
> anyone who wishes to engage in the dialectical type of radical practice
> initiated by Marx and further developed by the situationists. This dialectical
> method, which Alexander Herzen called "the algebra of revolution," cuts
> through traditional logic, expressing the dynamic manner in which things
> interact, how they divide, merge, grow, decay, and are transformed, sometimes
> even into their opposites. Because most of Hegel's work is quite difficult,
> commentaries and other secondary readings are almost essential. A good
> starting place might be Peter Singer's _Hegel: A Very Short Introduction_.

> "his justifications are too late…": C.f. Hegel, G., Wood, A. & Nisbet,
> H., 1991. Full quotation: "As for trying to teach the world what it ought to
> be, for this purpose philosophy always arrives too late. As the thought of the
> world, it appears only when actuality is already there."

> "his analysis… was able to escape separation": His work was able to cross
> specialized academic fields in order to articulate a line of integrated
> understanding.

> "the bourgeois revolutions of the 17^th^ and 18^th^ centuries": Most notably
> in England (1640-1660, 1688), America (1775-1788) and France (1789-1799).

> "that heroic force that does what it willed and willed what it has done…":
> C.f. Hegel, G. W. F., 2019, (Vol. 1, §140). Full quotation: "great men willed
> what they did, and did what they willed."

> "Philosophy… can glorify its world only by denying it.": According to Debord,
> Hegel's analysis glorified only the heroes whose work contributed directly to
> the conditions of the present, and ignores the work of those who contributed
> to the precursors & processes not existent in the conclusion. This philosophy
> can only be written once the conclusion is available, and its logic is only
> valuable when it can write judgement when the full scope of history is visible
> to draw upon.

> "the only court where truth can be judged has been adjourned": C.f. Hegel, G.,
> Wood, A. & Nisbet, H., 1991. Full quotation: "over finite spirits in world
> history as the world's court of judgement."

### 77

When the working class exert their power & presence through actions, they
demonstrate how they have not forgotten the historical thought. Their actions
demonstrate the denial of _the ends_ of historical thought, demonstrating the
very real possibility of new ends that they themselves will materialize. These
actions will simultaneously be a validation of _their methods_.

> "they have not forgotten the historical thought": C.f. Hegel, G., Hoffmeister,
> J., Nisbet, H. & Forbes, D., 1975. Full quotation: "Spirit often seems to have
> forgotten and lost itself, but inwardly opposed to itself, it is inwardly
> working ever forward as Hamlet says of the ghost of his father, 'Well done,
> old mole'-until grown strong in itself it bursts asunder the crust of earth
> which divided it from its sun, its Notion, so that the earth crumbles away."

> "the ends/new ends": Ends as in 'the ultimate goal' or 'ultimate purpose'.
> This language comes directly from Hegel: 'End of history' meaning the final
> form of human society, or the ultimate goal of the process of human social
> development. It does not imply that nothing more will ever happen. This is a
> denial of Hegel's idealized philosophical conclusion.

> "their methods": Hegel's dialectical methods.

### 78

Historical thought can only be salvaged by taking these theories of the
contemporary social order and transforming them into practical thought. The
actions of the working class as a revolutionary force can be nothing less than a
newly emergent historical consciousness operating over the entire world. The
theory powering previous _revolutionary_ workers movements: Stirner, Bakunin,
and Marx—grew out of a critical confrontation with Hegelian thought.

> Stimer: Max Stimer (1806-1856) a German individualist anarchist philosopher,
> author of _The Ego and His Own_.

> Bakunin: Mikhail Bakunin (1814-1876), Russian anarchist revolutionary.
> collaborator and then later opponent of Marx within the First International.

> Marx: Karl Marx (1818- 1883), German philosopher, economist, historian,
> sociologist, political theorist, journalist and socialist revolutionary.

### 79

Marx's theory is just as inseparable from the Hegelian method as it is
inseparable from that theory's revolutionary nature, that is, from its truth.
The strong ties between Marxist theory & Hegelian action was first
misunderstood, later ignored, and later denounced as a weakness—which was
mistakenly developing into a "Marxist" _dogma_. Bernstein, in "Evolutionary
Socialism" this inseparability was affirmed when he implicitly reveals the
connection between the dialectical method of Hegel and _historical partisanship_
in his analysis of Marx, he condemned the unscientific predictions of the
Communist Manifesto (1847) which proclaimed the imminence of a working class
revolution in Germany (and wider Europe): "This historical self-deception, so
erroneous that the most naive political visionary could hardly have done any
worse, would be incomprehensible in a Marx who at that time had already
seriously studied economics if we did not recognize that it reflected the
lingering influence of the antithetical Hegelian dialectic, from which Marx,
like Engels, could never completely free himself. In those times of general
effervescence this influence was all the more fatal to him."

> Eduard Bernstein's book _Evolutionary Socialism: A Criticism and Affirmation_
> was published in 1899. It was translated in 1911 and more recently as _The
> Preconditions of Socialism_ in 1993. Shortly after the Manifesto was
> published, both Paris and Germany erupted into the Revolutions of 1848. See
> Bernstein, E., 1911.

### 80

The radical _synthesis_ achieved by Marx and his branch of scientific socialism
was his ability to "salvage" the Hegelian method of dialectical thinking by
transplanting it from its roots in German idealist philosophy to his materialist
conception of nature and history; from the bourgeois revolution to the working
class theory of revolution. This work did not consist trivially of swapping the
development of the materialist system of production towards its historical
ends—with the development of the Hegelian Spirit moving towards its ultimate
encounter with itself, the Spirit whose objectification is identical to its
alienation and whose historical injuries leave no scars. For once history
becomes real, it no longer has an _end_. Marx's theory destroyed Hegel's stance
on _detachment_, that events which occur during the revolutionary event always
exist in some form in its conclusion, and eliminates the _contemplation_ of a
supreme external agent—only the events themselves exist. Thus, theory needs only
know those events which occur, those actions that are not part of the swing of
the dialectic as described by Hegel: revolutionary actions without theory or a
perspective on reality, immanent revolutionary action that physically transcends
and refutes theory. In contrast, contemporary society's passive _analysis_ of
the economy is a _stagnant_ vestige from the _undialectical_ aspect from Hegel's
attempt to create a self-referential system. It never attempts to rationalize
any higher-order aspect of society, and remains satisfied with a mere
self-validation of its own methods, and doesn't need Hegelianism to justify
itself or the sector of the economy it justifies. It simply validates the
financialized sector of the economy where thought no longer has any place, an
autonomous sector whose development dominates all others. Marx's project is that
of a conscious history. The quantitative that occurs in the unthinking
development of merely economic productive forces must change into qualitative
historical appropriation. This is to say that the task of revolution is to
reappropriate history in its actions by redefining history, both by
revolutionary & productive force of action. The _critique of political economy_
is the first act of the _end of prehistory_: "Of all the instruments of
production, the greatest productive power is the revolutionary class itself."

> "his ability to 'salvage'… by transplanting": C.f. Korsch, K., 1931. Full
> quotation: "The attempt made by the founders of scientific socialism to
> salvage the high art of dialectical thinking by transplanting it from the
> German idealist philosophy to the materialist conception of nature and
> history, from the bourgeois to the proletarian theory of revolution, appears,
> both historically and theoretically, as a transitory step only. What has been
> achieved is a theory not of the proletarian revolution developing on its own
> basis, but of a proletarian revolution that has just emerged from the
> bourgeois revolution; a theory which therefore in every respect, in content
> and in method, is still tainted with the birthmarks of Jacobinism, that is, of
> the revolutionary theory of the bourgeoisie."

> "historical injuries leave no scars" : C.f. Hegel, G., Miller, A. & Findlay,
> J., 1977. A détournement from Hegel, original quotation: "The wounds of the
> Spirit heal, and leave no scars behind."

> "For once history becomes real, it no longer has an end.": The original French
> is <q lang="fr">L'histoire devenue réelle n'a plus de fin</q>. Debord uses
> 'real' <q lang="fr">réelle</q> in the metaphysical sense. In more contemporary
> philosophy, the term used is 'Real' (see Baudrillard, J., 1994) which refers
> to the metaphysical condition of reality as presented in the media and
> inscribed into history, while actual physical reality is the 'real'. The
> 'real' is obscured by the metaphysical conditions presented by the media,
> while the 'Real' is portrayed as an increasing onslaught of mini-crises that
> play out in the daily media. Thus, once the pseudo-events of the Real are
> inscribed into history, the autonomous nature of the spectacle (here called
> history) no longer has any ultimate purpose (or ends), other than the
> reproduction of itself.

> "Marx's theory destroyed… transcends and refutes theory.": When Marx proposes
> a theory of a working class seizing the means of production, it must be done
> with practical action in addition to theory and law. It must be done in
> actions that change the zeitgeist—the common sense and spirit of the times
> must change to reflect these actions in order for the revolution to succeed.
> When revolutionary actions occur simultaneously with theory and
> practice—history and imagination work together to materialize an open
> trajectory for the emergence of a new society.

> "Of all the instruments… class itself"': C.f. Marx, K., 1995, (Ch. 2).

### 81

Marx's thought is scientific where it understands and analyses the forces that
operate in society, but his thought _supersedes_ science in its drive to
understand the _struggles_ throughout history (of the proletariat striving to
achieve real power) and not merely its _laws_. "We know only a single science:
the science of history."

> "We recognize… the science of history.": See Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1998.
> (Part I, Ch. 1, Section 1).

### 82

The bourgeois period wishes to explain history with science, but this science is
limited to the economy, so it can only ever become a _history of economics_. The
scientific and yet limited perspective of economics overlooks history's effect
on the economy, a process that continually modifies its own scientific premises
to prove its own conclusions—best exemplified by the socialist states who
thought they had calculated the exact periodicity of economic crises. These
crises are only mitigated by the constant intervention of the state. The project
of transcending the economy, and appropriating history must indeed grasp and
incorporate the science of society, but it cannot be a merely _scientific_
project. The revolutionary movement will remain merely _bourgeois_ if it limits
itself to mastering the economy, and economic history by means of a merely
scientific approach.

> "a process that continually modifies its own scientific premises to prove its
> own conclusions": This is the same type of ideological reasoning used by
> doomsday cults who continually push their predictions of the End Times into
> the future. Thus, The End Times are always just around the corner, and have
> been for the last two thousand years.

> "The revolutionary movement will remain merely bourgeois if it limits itself
> to mastering the economy": Debords' critique contends that existing class
> distinctions rely on a division of labor that continually creates separation
> between theorists and practicioners. Namely, there are the designer/theorists:
> those who know and do not act—technocrats and economists by another name. Then
> there are the builders/laymen: those who act and do not know. The task of the
> revolutionary movement is not to merely master the redesign of economy, but to
> both design and build a new society with both theory and practice.

### 83

Utopian Socialism offered a vision of socialism that was a critique of
capitalism, but one that didn't go far enough, which is to say that their vision
remains constrained by the limitations of purely economic science. Their utopian
vision ignores history, the actual struggles of daily life, and ignores the more
recent developments of society that have moved beyond the conditions that
originally generated their now-dated utopian imagination of a happy society. On
the contrary, they want to continue the application of rationality and science
to lend social credibility to the control of power with purely scientific
methods that are now centuries old. These technocrats do not consider themselves
unarmed missionaries, but as warrior-monks, for they are faithful to the social
power of scientific proof; or in the case of Saint-Simonism and the other
utopian socialists, in the seizure of power by science. Sombart asked "How can
anything that is to be accomplished by intellectual illumination, or at most by
example, be achieved through _strife_?" (Sombart, W., 1896). But the utopians'
scientific understanding did not include the awareness that the wealthy have
vested interests in maintaining the status quo, a monopoly on force, and control
the media to promote a false consciousness. Their limited perspective thus
obscured the recent developments of the economic sciences itself, which were at
that time largely driven by the _wealthy classes_ who determined both which
areas were scientifically acceptable to study, as well as which of those areas
were worthy of funding. The Utopian Socialists thus remained prisoners to the
_scientific method of exposing the truth_, conceiving this truth as a purely
abstract model—although one that had been imposed by an earlier stage of the
development of society. Their model is an abstract image which doesn't include
enough context, or resolution to be adequate or sufficient. As Sorel remarked,
their science is based upon the model of _astronomy_, which they think they can
use to discover and demonstrate the laws of society. The balance they aim for,
which is hostile to, and disregards history, is the result of an attempt to
apply the least historically dependent science of economics to the understanding
of society. They described this balance as if they were Newton discovering
universal scientific laws, and the happy understanding they continually promote
"[that they] believed that he had found a 'social dynamic' which often compared
to celestial mechanics." (Sorel, G., 2018)

> Utopian Socialism was the first current of socialist thought as exemplified by
> the work of Henri de Saint-Simon (1760-1825), Charles Fourier (1772-1837),
> Étienne Cabet (1788-1856), Robert Owen (1771-1858) and Henry George
> (1839-1897). Their theories were contrasted with the "scientific socialism" of
> Marx and Engels.

> "unarmed missionaries": Machiavelli (Machiavelli, N., Bull, G. & Grafton,
> A., 2003) compares "armed prophets" and "unarmed prophets" in Chapter 6, here
> I found missionaries and warrior-monks a cleaner comparison.

> "the wealthy have vested interests in maintaining the status quo… and control
> the media to promote a false consciousness." C.f. Sombart, W., 1896. Full
> quotation is "So far as his [Owen's] followers assume that the present order
> of things is nothing other than a mistake, that only for this reason men find
> themselves in their present position, that misery rules in the world only
> because man has not known thus far how to make it better—that is false. The
> utopists fail to see, in their optimism, that a part of this society looks
> upon the _status quo_ as thoroughly satisfactory and desires no change, that
> this part also has an interest in sustaining it, and that a specific condition
> of society always obtains because those persons who are interested in it have
> the power to sustain it."

### 84

The gap in Marx's work between practice and scientific theory is the weakness
into which the wedge of ideology was forced, both during his own lifetime and
even more so in the theoretical heritage left to interpretation by the workers
movement. The acceptance of the individual as subject to the events and material
basis of history remains postponed, and instead a dogmatic faith in historical
economics dominates understanding, which only increases the oversimplification,
contradiction, and misunderstanding that guarantee its eventual obsolescence.
This faith ignores the theoretical vision offered by revolutionary practice,
which is the only means of attaining truth. This faith sees it as essential to
study purely economic development, to quietly accept with Hegelian tranquility
the suffering this development imposes. Into this gap, new scientific economic
models are pushed while real revolutionary actions are ignored such that actions
become "a graveyard of good intentions." According to this blind faith, the
self-described "science of revolutions", concludes that _consciousness always
comes too soon_, and therefore requires a misguided education of the working
class. "History has shown that we, and all who thought like us, were wrong"
(Engels, F., 1903) Engels wrote in 1895, continuing "It has made it plain that
the condition of economic development on the continent at that time was not yet
ripe enough by far for the abolition of capitalist production…" (ibid). Marx
maintained a consistent perspective on his theory throughout his life, but his
_expression_ of this theory changed as it often took place on the _terrain_ of
the dominant thought of the times—taking the form of critiques of specific areas
of discourse, most notably the critique of the political economy, the realm of
bourgeois society. It was this constrained form of Marx's work that was
gradually reinterpreted into a simplified and dogmatic "Marxism"—which ignored
on-the-ground reality, instead merely reading the tea leaves of the economic
sciences—which can never reveal when the ground is ripe for revolutionary
action.

> "the wedge of ideology": The original French is <q lang="fr">laquelle pénétra
> le processus d'‹idéologisation›.</q>, or "into which penetrated the process of
> 'ideologization'." In this sense both Debord and Marx consider 'ideology' to
> be a rigid and increasingly dogmatic interpretation of the purely scientific
> aspects of Marxism at the expense of the practical.

> "consciousness always comes too soon": C.f. Hegel, G., Wood, A. & Nisbet,
> H., 1991. A détournement from the original quote, which reads: "philosophy, at
> any rate, always comes too late to perform this function."

### 85

Weakened and dogmatic "Marxism" is linked to the fundamental weakness of the
revolutionary proletariat of his times. The German working class failed to
initiate a permanent revolution in 1848; the Paris Commune was defeated in
isolation. As a result, revolutionary theory could not yet be fully realized.
The dogmatic steadfastness to Marxist theory leaves the movement vulnerable to a
state of inflexibility when unanticipated conditions arise from the activity on
the ground. While in exile in England, Marx was reduced to refining his theory
under isolated conditions working at the British Museum; the conclusions he
arrived at later became obstacles and dogmatic fixtures that obscure the theory
of his work for later proletarian revolutionaries.

> "The German working class… 1848": See Engels, F., Marx, K., 1907.

> "The Paris Commune was defeated... ": See Marx, K., Kemp, A., 1968. See also
> _Theses on the Paris Commune_ Knabb, K., 2006 (Pp. 398-401).

### 86

The purely _scientific_ theoretical defense of the proletarian revolution, is
insufficiently theorized in both content and form; namely in that it
misidentifies the proletariat with the bourgeoisie as those _responsible for the
revolutionary seizure of power_.

### 87

Marx's continual effort to demonstrate the scientific basis of a legitimate
proletarian power can be seen as early as the _Communist Manifesto_, in which he
cites a _repetitive_ sequence of experimental precedents, leading him to support
an oversimplified _linear_ progression of the development of the modes of
production. Furthermore, his analysis stipulated that this progression was
brought on by a class struggle that results in "either in a revolutionary
reconstitution of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contending
classes." (Marx, K., Engels, F. & Jones, G., 2002. Pp. 219) In reality, it is
seen that in Asia (i.e. China with the "Asiatic mode of production" that Marx
had noted elsewhere) these struggles resulted in neither outcome, and in spite
of all the class conflicts through historical times; nor did any serf revolt
overthrow the lords during feudalism, nor did the slave revotls of ancient times
result in the rule of free men. This framework of linear progression overlooks
the insight that _the bourgeoisie is the only revolutionary class that has ever
won the class struggle_—at the same time it is the only class for whom the
development of the economy has been the cause and consequence of its control
over society. Marx ignored the state's contributions to the economic management
of class-based society. If the bourgeois revolution seemed to liberate the
economy from the state, it was because the state used the economy as an
instrument of class oppression during a period of economic instability. The
emergent bourgeoisie developed its autonomous economic power in the medieval
period when the states were weakest, in the moment of fragmentation of the
feudal balanced powers. In contrast, the bourgeoisie was able to _secure their
own state_ in its contemporary form, which emerged from the institutionalization
of the practice of mercantilism—this state directly supported their class
interests. This state developed at the time of "laissez faire, laisser passer",
later proved to be endowed with a central power in the calculated management of
the _economic process_. What Marx would later describe as "Bonapartism", is the
fusion of capital and state power, a "public force organized for social
enslavement", one in which the bourgeoisie is totally disenfranchised from the
events of a historical life by a new politics of "the things created by the
modes of production" to such an extent that they were "condemned to the same
political nullity as all the other classes". This statement negatively implies
that the proletariat is _the only remaining inheritor to a historical life_,
albeit a pretend one. Thus, the socio-political foundations have been laid for
the contemporary society of the spectacle.

> "its political power must be broken; that the individual bourgeois can
> continue to exploit the other classes and enjoy undisturbed property, family,
> religion and order only on the condition that their class be condemned to the
> same political nullity as all the other classes; that in order to save its
> purse, it must forfeit the crown" Marx, K. (1963).

> "laissez faire, laisser passer": The phrase is generally attributed to Vincent
> de Gournay who had made it his maxim: "laissez faire, laissez passer, le monde
> va de lui même" or "Let it do, let it pass, the world does its' own thing".
> See Albon, C. d., 1775.

> "What Marx would later describe as 'Bonapartism'... 'the same political
> nullity as all the other classes'": See Marx, K., 1963 (Ch. 4). Full quote: "…
> that in order to restore tranquility in the country, its own bourgeois
> parliament must be brought to a halt; that in order to preserve its social
> power intact, its political power must be broken; that the individual
> bourgeois can continue to exploit the other classes and enjoy undisturbed
> property, family, religion and order only on the condition that their class be
> condemned to the same political nullity as all the other classes; that in
> order to save its purse, it must forfeit the crown." Marx's text analyzes the
> process in which the social instability following the French revolution of
> 1848 caused the bourgeoisie to support the 1852 coup d'etat by Louis-Napoleon
> Bonaparte (nephew of the famous general Napoleon) who would save their wealth
> at the expense of their political autonomy.

### 88

Marx defines two classes in his theory developed in _Capital_, these are the
only two revolutionary classes that have existed in history, but operating under
different conditions. Bourgeois: their revolution has been completed, they
control the developed economy. Proletariat: theirs is an ongoing project—built
on the foundations of their previous revolutions, but they must tailor their new
revolution unique to the conditions on the ground, and differing qualitatively.
By ignoring the _uniqueness_ of the historical role of the bourgeoisie, one
hides the concrete uniqueness of the proletarian project which can achieve
nothing unless it carries its own sigils and knows "the immensity of its tasks".
The bourgeoisie came to power because it is the class that arose with the
developing economy. The proletariat can only come to power by becoming the
_class of consciousness_. The increasing efficiency of the productive forces
does not guarantee such power, in fact it only increases the dispossession of
the proletariat. Nor can a Jacobin-style seizure of the state cannot be its
means to this end. The proletariat cannot use _ideology_ designed to disguise
the goal of a partial reimagination of society when a total reimagination of
society is necessary in order to call it a society that is truly its own.

> "and [it] knows the immensity of its tasks": Marx uses this phrase in several
> places, e.g. "Proletarian revolutions… recoil again and again before the
> immensity of their tasks, until a situation is finally created that goes
> beyond the point of no return" Marx, K., 1963 (Ch. 1).

> "The increasing efficiency of the productive forces does not guarantee such
> power": It is actually quite the opposite. Under the global neoliberal
> economic regime that emerged in the 1980s, and the resulting wage stagnation
> among workers and increasing wealth of the ruling classes, it's become
> apparent that all increases in productivity have benefitted the owners of
> capital, and not the workers themselves, resulting in an increase of
> dispossession.

> "a total reimagination of society is necessary": The goal of the proletariat
> is to become the creator of a totally reimagined society which includes
> everybody, or it will fail as it includes nobody.

### 89

Marx never placed faith in economic forecasting. He even wrote about the limits
of his theory in a well-known letter to Engels on December 7^th^ 1867, in which
he presents a critical view of his theory with the wish that Engels would submit
the letter to the press as the work of an adversary. In the letter, Marx
described _Capital_ as limited to conclusions that were both logical and
internally consistent with itself, and with respect to history, but present
conditions on the ground may not actually connect with theory: "…the author's
_subjective_ tendency (perhaps imposed on him by his political positions and his
past actions), that is to say, the way in which he pictures himself, and
portrays for others has nothing whatsoever to do with his critical analysis."
This contradiction revealed the full nature of his methodology of theory &
practice: that the conditions that exist in reality must inform theory and
theory must inform practice.

### 90

Theory and practice must go hand in hand, as one guarantees the validity of the
other. At the _moment of the revolutionary event_, the proletarian class must
congeal into a conscious subject with the organization of actions on the ground
to further their own interests with the reorganization of society. This is where
_practical conditions of consciousness must exist_, If this occurs, it confirms
theory with practice by becoming practical theory. However, the central question
of organization was ignored by revolutionary theory at the time when the
workers' movement was beginning to take shape, that is, when this theory was
still _unified_ with practice it had inherited from historical thought (thought
which vowed to develop into unified historical _practice_). Instead, the
organizational question became the weakest aspect of radical theory, a confused
terrain mired down by a revival of hierarchical command structures borrowed from
the state and inherited from the bourgeois revolution. Organizational forms that
are co-opted from state become a weakening force that break up the unity of the
movement into specialized and ideologically fragmented disciplines that will be
unable to recognize the success of practical actions and unified theory of
working class struggles. Instead it represses every manifestation of struggle
and undermines the memory of their successes. Practice is least theorized as it
requires unique conditions and unique actions responding to the dynamic changes
to the terrain underfoot. Practice must be planned immediately, as to prevent
its dissemination and potential for disruption. Verification of theory emerges
from successful application and deployment of practice. The _Soviet_, for
example, was never theorized, but its practice verified the theoretical truth of
the existence of the International Workers' Association.

> conscious subject/consciousness: See glossary: "Consciousness".

> "theory with practice by becoming practical theory": According to Debord this
> is detourned from Lukács, G., 1971.

> "a revival of hierarchical command structures borrowed from the state": Or,
> more contemporaneously, borrowing organization and management structures from
> business.

> "The Soviet… was never theorized": The first soviet (Russian for "council")
> was spontaneously formed by striking workers during the 1905 Russian
> revolution. No previous radical theorists had envisaged this form of popular
> self-organization, however obvious it may have seemed in retrospect.

> "its practice verified the theoretical truth of its existence…": Détourned
> from Marx, K., Kemp, A., 1968; full quotation "the greatest social measure of
> the [Paris] Commune was its own working existence."

> International Workers' Association: The International Workingmen's Association
> (IWA), often called the First International (1864–1876), was an international
> organisation which aimed at uniting a variety of different left-wing
> socialist, communist and anarchist groups and trade unions that were based on
> the working class and class struggle. It was founded in 1864 in a workmen's
> meeting held in St. Martin's Hall, London, and dissolved in the 1870s
> following the split between the Marxist and Bakuninist factions.

### 91

The initial successes of the First International lead it to free itself from the
confused ideology existing for a while within itself. Soon afterwards it
encountered defeat and repression as it split into two competing concepts of the
proletarian revolution, both led by an _authoritarian_ dimension that undermined
the conscious self-emancipation of the working class. On one side, Bakunin
fought along the anarchist line: focused on the question of power in a future
revolutionary society, against the illusion that classes could be abolished by
means of an authoritarian form of state power, warning that this would lead to
the formation of a bureaucratic ruling class, and to the dictatorship of the
most knowledgeable (a technocratic meritocracy, or of those reputed to be such).
On the other side was Marx, focused on the question of the organization of the
current movement, who thought that the economic contradictions in democracy
(democratic capitalism), and the education of the proletariat in democratic
values would reduce the influence of the role of the state to a brief period of
development necessary to legislate the new social relations brought into being
by economic conditions—denounced Bakunin and his supporters as an authoritarian
conspiratorial elite who were deliberately placing themselves above the First
International with the goal of imposing on society a dictatorship of the most
revolutionary (or who had designated themselves as such). Bakunin effectively
recruited his followers on such a basis: "In the midst of the popular storm we
must be the invisible pilots guiding the revolution, not through any kind of
overt power but through the collective dictatorship of our alliance. A
dictatorship without any insignia, or titles, or official status, yet all the
more powerful because it will have none of the appearances of power." These
opposing groups were both partially true, but both lost the unity of historical
thought, and still attempted to make themselves _ideological authorities_.
Powerful organizations such as the Iberian Anarchist Federation and the German
Social Democracy attempted to implement these working-class ideologies
accordingly; the results were very different from what had been intended.

> First International: The International Working Men's Association, founded in
> London in 1864 and dissolved in the 1870s following the split between the
> Marxist and Bakuninist factions.

> "an authoritarian dimension that undermined the conscious self-emancipation of
> the working class.": C.f. the opening line of the Rules of the First
> International: "Considering that the emancipation of the working classes must
> be conquered by the working classes themselves…"

> "…the invisible pilots… but through the collective dictatorship of our
> alliance.": Quoted from Bakunin's Letter to Albert Richard (August 1870),
> excerpted from Bakunin, M. A., 1980. The "Alliance" was Bakunin's secret
> organization, the International Alliance for Social Democracy.

> "… the results were very different from what had been intended.": A
> détournement of the introduction by Engels, see Marx, K., Dutt, C. P., Engels,
> F., 1895, Pp 18. Full quotation: "the Commune was consumed in unfruitful
> strife between the two parties which divided it, the Blanquists (the majority)
> and the Proudhonists (the minority), neither of which knew what was to be
> done."

### 92

Collectivist anarchism focuses on the outcome of the revolution as the
_immediately present_ condition of revolution itself as its ultimate goal, which
constitutes both its greatest strength and its greatest weakness. As such,
anarchism has contempt for method and practice (the collectivist and socialist
anarchist struggles are the only forms of anarchism that can be taken seriously,
the pretensions of the individualist and libertarian forms of anarchism have
always been laughable). Its critique of the _political struggle_ remains too
abstract and too ideologically pure—its methods are constrained by its
single-minded focus on an ideal outcome, and focuses only on the strategy of the
single blow of the general strike, or the insurrection, ignoring all historical
thought of other contemporary class struggles. The anarchists strive to _realize
an ideal_. In this way, anarchism is the _ideologic_ negation of the state and
of class society, that is to say, the negation of the very social preconditions
that generate separate ideologies. Anarchism is _the ideology of pure freedom_
which makes everyone equal without a class or hierarchy, and removes any notions
of historical evil. This positions anarchism above the merely specific and
reformist stances of other political ideologies with its singular
all-encompassing demand (no classes), which provides anarchism the great merit
of representing the refusal of existing conditions in favor of the unitary
condition that enables the whole of life and which drive all subsequent changes
to daily life. At the same time, this singular demand that lacks any semblance
of practice condemns anarchism to an all too obvious incoherence. This causes
the movement of anarchism to be repeatedly injected into every struggle, using
the same vision and all-encompassing methods every time. When Bakunin quit the
Jura Federation in 1873 he wrote on the theory of anarchism: "During the past
nine years the International has developed more than enough ideas to save the
world, if ideas alone could save it, and I challenge anyone to come up with a
new one. It's no longer the time for ideas, it's time for actions." This
attitude concludes that historical and existing revolutionary theory is
sufficient, but it must be implemented in practice. It makes the assumption
however, that the transition from theory to practice has already been discovered
and not subject to change.

> anarchism: For a good historical overview, see Guerin, D. 2005. For an
> enjoyable fictional account of an anarchist civilization that implements "the
> revolution as the immediately present condition of revolution itself as its
> ultimate goal" see Le Guin, U. K., 1994.

> "The anarchists strive to realize an ideal": This is a détournement of Marx,
> K., Kemp, A., 1968. Full quotation: "They know that in order to work out their
> own emancipation, and along with it that higher form to which present society
> is irresistibly tending, by its own economical agencies, they will have to
> pass through long struggles, through a series of historical processes,
> transforming circumstances of men. They have no ideals to realize, but to set
> free the elements of the new society with which old collapsing bourgeois
> society itself is pregnant."

> _"removes any notions of historical evil"_: From the French _"écarte toute
> idée du mal historique."_ C.f. Hegel, G. W. F., Paolucci, A., 2001. Full
> quotation: _"the Sunday of life which equalizes everything and removes all
> evil; people who are so whole-heartedly cheerful cannot be altogether evil and
> base."_ The "Historical evil" (mal historique), could also be translated as
> "the bad side of history" is also referenced in Marx, as a response to the
> anarchist Proudhon's simple distinction between the "good" and "bad" sides of
> various historical events _"It is the bad side that produces the movement
> which makes history, by constituting the struggle."_ see Marx, K., 1995.

> Jura Federation: Anarchist leaning section of the First International based in
> the Jura mountain region of France and Switzerland.

### 93

Anarchists distinguish themselves from the greater revolutionary movement by
their ideological fervor and conviction, they use that conviction as well as how
much one can recite standardized anarchist theory as a metric to separate the
ranks amongst themselves. One can determine the level of mediocrity of a given
anarchist by the way their intellectual activity is limited to repeating a
number of unchanging "truths" with which they cling to. Within the revolutionary
organization, unanimity works well to make discussions and eliminate hierarchy,
but it generates its own uncontrolled authority within the organization itself:
_the freedom specialist_. They expect this form of governance to expand outwards
to the general populace. This mindset refuses to take into account just how
opposed their views are from general society, and how it will be impossible to
reach unanimity with coexisting workers movements under such conditions. This
continues to generate a permanent separation of anarchists at the very moment of
the common decision, as shown by the countless number of individualist anarchist
groups across the country during the Spanish Revolution, each individually
destroyed at a local level because they could never gather universal cohesion.

> Spanish Revolution: A workers' social revolution that began during the
> outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 until 1939 resulting in the
> widespread implementation of anarchist and more broadly libertarian socialist
> organizational principles throughout various portions of the country,
> primarily in Catalonia, Aragon, Andalusia, and parts of the Valencian
> Community. It was fought by the fascist forces of General Francisco Franco and
> the popularly elected Republic who was supported by the bourgeois.

### 94

The illusion explicitly maintained by anarchism is that a revolution is just
around the corner, immediately proving the validity of anarchist organization
and ideologies. During the Spanish Revolution an army pronunciation sparked the
way for an anarchist revolution that was partially successful in establishing
the most advanced model of power of all time. It must be remembered that the
revolution began as a defensive reaction to the army's attempted coup. The
revolution was not immediately victorious, as Franco held half of the country
with the Bourgeois republicans support of the state apparatus as well as
international aid since the international workers movements had already been
defeated. The anarchists proved unable to extend their victories beyond their
own local territory, or even to defend it. Ultimately their leaders became
hostages to the state who dismantled the revolution as it proceeded to lose the
civil war.

### 95

The Second International believed in "Orthodox Marxism" as its form of ideology
supporting a socialist revolution. The key tenets of which were that Marxism was
completely about scientifically measured objective economic processes, and the
leading organization must educate the working class about these objective
economic processes. The idea of educating the working class was borrowed from
the utopian socialists, which mixed demonstration with _contemplative_ teachings
of the course of history, a style in which practice was diminished beneath
theory. This was completely out of touch with the Hegelian aspect of an
education of a totalizing history, and out of touch with the static image of a
totality as presented by the utopian socialists (best exemplified by Fourier).
Those who failed to realize that for Marx, theory was not to be separate from
practice, and to do so guarantees its students to fall victim to the
inevitability of finance capitalism with a contemplative and yet paralyzed
response. This scientific perspective produces false dichotomies between ethical
choices, and the nonsense like that of Hilferding when he claims in Finance
Capital that socialism "gives no clue as to what practical attitude show be
adopted, for it is one thing to recognize a necessity, and quite another to
place oneself in service to that necessity." (Hilferding, 1981). The failure of
this group was the failure to recognize that for Marx, it was a unitary
historical thought that was _in no way separate from practical actions to be
adopted_, and therefore the lack of _both_ theory _and_ practice that entailed
the revolutionary party would fall victim to their own exercise of power.

> Second International: Also known as the Socialist International, an
> organisation of socialist and labour parties formed in Paris on 14 July 1889
> continuing the work of the dissolved First International, though excluding the
> still-powerful anarcho-syndicalist movement. It broke up in 1916 when most of
> its constituent parties abandoned their previous internationalist antiwar
> policy and rallied to their respective national governments during World War
> I.

> Fourier: Charles Fourier (1772 – 1837) was a French philosopher, an
> influential early socialist thinker and one of the founders of utopian
> socialism. Some of Fourier's social and moral views, held to be radical in his
> lifetime, have become mainstream thinking in modern society. For instance,
> Fourier is credited with having originated the word feminism in 1837.

> Hilferding: Quotation from the Preface to Hilferding, R. & Bottomore,
> T., 1981.

### 96

The ideology of the social democratic organizations handed power to _teachers_
tasked with educating the proletariat, and this passive (a curriculum that
focuses mostly on theory, yet little on practice) style dictated the
organization of the movement into a passive state of contemplative and
_uncritical_ non-action against capitalism. The Second International practiced
the _reform_ of a propertarian and capitalist organization of society while
presenting the _illusion of revolution_. The success of the revolution would be
undermined by the leaders who claimed its success. The privileged position of
the bureaucrats and journalists enticed the existing bourgeois intelligentsia as
well as the proletariat to join their ranks, while industrial workers who had
been recruited out of struggles in the factories were transformed by the
labor-union bureaucracy into mere brokers of labor-power, buying worker-labor as
a commodity like any other. For the activities of these people to maintain any
semblance of appearing revolutionary, capitalism would need to have been
incapable of tolerating the reforms they advocated for, and yet all these
reforms were easily accepted. This activity contradicts the very revolution
against commodification and undoes the fundamental ideology of a movement that
claims to reduce commodification.

### 97

Bernstein contradicted himself in being the social democrat least attached to
the grip of political ideology while at the same time most openly attached to
the methodology of bourgeois science. He was honest enough to point out this
contradiction, one equally demonstrated when the English workers reformist
revolution had shown proof of a socialist revolution without a working class
educated in socialist theory. Historical developments since have proven this
again and again, without a doubt. Bernstein rejected the notion that a crisis of
capitalism would force the socialists into revolution because the they needed to
ignite their own revolution in order to claim legitimate control. The social
upheaval started by the first world war raised the consciousness of the people,
but twice demonstrated the failures of the socialists to educate the German
working class in revolutionary theory: first when the socialist party majority
rallied to imperialist war, second in their own defeat—the party squashing those
members supporting the Spartacist revolutionaries. The socialist party leader
and ex-worker, Fridrich Ebert believed in sin, and hated revolution "like sin".
Ebert later went on to become the precursor to the _image of socialism_,
bankrupt of its original ideologies when he became the mortal enemy of the
Soviet Russian proletariat. Ebert summed up this bankruptcy when he aptly
proclaimed: "Socialism means working a lot."

> Bernstein: Eduard Bernstein's book _Die Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und
> die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie_ ("The Prerequisites for Socialism and the
> Tasks of Social Democracy") was published in 1899, and its "revisionist"
> positions provoked heated debates for many years afterwards. See Bernstein, E.
> & Tudor, H. 1993.

> Spartacist revolutionaries / Friedrich Ebert: Following the German defeat in
> 1918, there were mutinies and revolts throughout Germany. The Kaiser's regime
> was replaced by a "Socialist" government headed by Friedrich Ebert, but
> revolts continued, culminating in a general strike and insurrection in Berlin
> in January 1919 involving the Spartakist League, a revolutionary socialist
> organization founded by Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht. Ebert's regime,
> with the assistance of the rightwing paramilitary Freikorps, crushed the
> Spartakist revolt and murdered Liebknecht and Luxemburg.

### 98

Lenin was a faithful and consistent _Kautskyist_ when it comes to his Marxist
thinking. He applied the _revolutionary ideology_ of "orthodox Marxism" to the
conditions in Russia that had resisted the merely reformist practices carried on
elsewhere by the Second International. In Russia, the Bolsheviks lead from the
_outside_, using intellectuals who transformed into "professional
revolutionaries", a clandestine group tasked with teaching and leading the
working-class from the top-down. This group gave rise to a genuine
profession—one disinclined to make deals with the managerial class of capitalist
society (the Czarist regime, by this point, was totally incapable of offering
any such compromise, because the bourgeois class had emerged as an intervening
power with the ability to block any compromise). The consequence of this groups
specialization was the fixation upon the _management of total social
domination_.

> "Lenin… Kautskyist": Debord notes that the Russian Bolshevik leader Vladimir
> Ilyich Lenin (1870-1924) and the German social-democratic leader Karl Kautsky
> (1854-1938), though bitterly at odds in certain respects, were fundamentally
> aligned in many others, notably the belief that a professional revolutionary
> "vanguard" party of specialists must lead the proletariat from the outside.
> Lenin cites Kautsky directly: "Thus, socialist consciousness is something
> introduced into the proletarian class struggle from without and not something
> that arose within it spontaneously." (Lenin, V. 1961). They both believed the
> proletariat were merely capable of organizing within their own soviet groups
> (or unions), but lacked a universal consciousness beyond their own class. This
> amounted to decapitating the proletariat so that the party could put itself at
> the 'head' of the revolution. The Situationist pamphlet _On the Poverty of
> Student Life_ is most critical of Lenin: "Contesting the proletariat's
> historical capacity to liberate itself, as Lenin did so ruthlessly, means
> contesting its capacity to totally run the future society. In such a
> perspective, the slogan "All power to the soviets" meant nothing more than the
> conquest of the soviets by the Party and the installation of the party state
> in place of the withering-away 'state' of the armed proletariat." See Knabb,
> K., 2006 (Pp. 426-427).

> Bolsheviks: A faction founded by Vladimir Lenin and Alexander Bogdanov that
> split from the Menshevik faction of the Marxist Russian Social Democratic
> Labour Party (RSDLP), a revolutionary socialist political party formed in
> 1898, at its Second Party Congress in 1903.

### 99

World War I brought about a collapse of international social democracy as
nationalism took its place, and the radical authoritarian ideology of the
Bolsheviks quickly spread its influence around the world. The democratic
movements of the proletariat came to various bloody ends, and Russian-style
Bolshevism filled the vacuum left by this crisis. The Bolsheviks brought with it
a hierarchical ideology, enticing the working class to "speak Russian" by
applying this model against the ruling class. Lenin didn't denounce the Marxism
of the Second International for being a revolutionary _ideology_, but for
ceasing to be a _revolutionary_ ideology.

### 100

The very moment when Bolshevism celebrated its victory _for itself_ in Russia,
and when social democracy fought victoriously for _the old world_, marked the
shift to our contemporary state of affairs. This shift marked the foundation of
spectacular domination: the _representation_ of the working class had become the
_enemy_ of the working class.

> "when Bolshevism celebrated its victory for itself in… for the old world": In
> more detail: "The triumph of the Bolshevik order coincided with the
> international counter revolutionary movement that began with the crushing of
> the Spartakists by German 'Social Democracy.' The commonality of the jointly
> victorious Bolshevism and reformism went deeper than their apparent
> antagonism, for the Bolshevik order also turned out to be merely a new
> variation on the old theme, a new guise of the old order. ... Capitalism, in
> its bureaucratic and bourgeois variants, won a new lease on life, over the
> dead bodies of the sailors of Kronstadt, the peasants of the Ukraine, and the
> workers of Berlin, Kiel, Turin, Shanghai, and finally Barcelona" See Knabb, K.
> 2006 (Pp. 422-423).

### 101

On December 21st, 1918 Rosa Luxemburg wrote in _Die Rote Fahne_ "In all previous
revolutions the combatants faced each other face to face: class against class,
programme against programme. In the present revolution the protection troops of
the old order do not intervene under the banner of the ruling classes, but under
the flag of a "social-democratic party". If the central question of the
revolution were asked openly and honestly: capitalism or socialism, no doubt, no
hesitation would be possible today in the great mass of the proletariat." Thus,
just a few days before the January 1919 destruction of the Spartakist uprising
(and the murder of Luxemburg) she discovered the key secret of how the
conditions leading to the formation (and the support by the proletariat) of the
social-democrat coalition—lead to the support of the ruling class and the
defense of the status quo—a complete undermining of the revolution. This led
directly to a new social reign of appearances under which no "central question"
could be "open and honestly" posed. By this point, the leaders of the
proletariat had betrayed the revolution but supported the revolutionary image,
that is both the cause and the result of a general falsification of society.

> Rosa Luxemburg: (1871-1919) A Polish-German Marxist revolutionary and founding
> member of the Spartacus League. Killed during the suppression of the
> Spartakist uprising.

> Die Rote Fahne: (The Red Flag) A German newspaper created on 9 November 1918
> by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg in Berlin, most famously as the
> mouthpiece of the Spartacus League.

> "supported the revolutionary image…": In this case, in support of the social
> democrat party.

### 102

The organization of the Russian working class on the Bolshevik model stems first
from the economic immaturity of Russian conditions, and second due to the
abandoning the revolutionary workers struggle in economically developed
countries. This same backwardness unconsciously contained at its organization's
initial core, a momentum towards a counter-revolutionary overthrow. Evidence of
this behavior was the continuing failure of European workers movements in the
face of the _<span lang="la">hic Rhodus, hic salta</span>_ moment during the
1918-1920 period of social upheaval—a failure that included the violent
destruction of their own radical minority party members. The failure of the
Bolshevik party to prove itself was used to undo the gains made by the workers,
and instead used to present the party to the world as the only solution to the
organization of the working class. The seizure of the state monopoly on power,
the representation and defense of workers power, which formed the basis of
legitimacy for the Bolshevik party, _became what it already was_: the party of
_the owners of the working class_, eliminating any previous forms of ownership.

> "Hic Rhodus, hic salta": From the Latin phrase "Prove it, right here, right
> now." During the 1918-1920 period in the aftermath of World War I, Debord
> considered the European workers movement a failure in that they never took
> full advantage of favorable conditions, which included the fall of many
> governments, and a general sense of social upheaval.

> "violent destruction of their own radical minority party members": Namely the
> murder of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht.

### 103

The Russian social democrats argued about theory for twenty years, concerned
with which conditions were most favorable to overthrow Czarism: the weakness of
the bourgeoisie, the shift in power to the peasant majority, the decisive role
to be played by a centralized and militant working class, and so on. Finally,
practice won over theory when the revolutionary bureaucracy placed itself at the
head of the working class, seized the state and imposed a new form of class rule
upon society. All other theories of revolution were impossible: a strictly
bourgeois revolution; a "democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants"
was meaningless lip service; the proletarian power fought uphill against small
landowners, there was a looming threat of the national and international White
movement, and the alienated people this party represented—namely the absolute
rulers of the state, the economy, the press, and eventually the expression of
thought. Lenin espoused the only workable theory as proposed by Trotsky and
Parvus in April 1917, a theory of permanent revolution that would work in
countries with an underdeveloped bourgeois economy, but even in these specific
conditions it could only work when the class bureaucracy came to power. In his
many clashes with the Bolshevik leadership, Lenin was consistent in his push for
leadership and power to be held in the hands of the ideological group of
representatives: a dictatorship. He pragmatically championed solutions that
flowed logically from the earlier decisions of the minority group that now held
absolute power: A democracy refused to peasants at the state-level should also
be refused to workers, to communist union leaders, to party leaders in general,
and even the highest ranks in the party hierarchy. At the 10^th^ Congress, by
then the Kronstadt soviet was violently gunned down and slandered in the press,
Lenin passed a judgement of the leftist bureaucrats of the "Workers' Opposition"
party which would set the future course of leadership under Stalin: "[in] Here
with us—or out there with guns in your hand—but not as an opposition (party).
We've had enough opposition."

> "democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants": An early Bolshevik
> slogan. In French: <q lang="fr">dictature démocratique des ouvriers et des
> paysans.</q> from the original Russian <q lang="ru">Демократическая диктатура
> пролетариата и крестьянства</q>.

> White movement: The White movement was a loose confederation of anti-communist
> forces that fought the Communist Bolsheviks, also known as the Reds, in the
> Russian Civil War.

> Trotsky: Leon Trotsky (1879- 1940), Russian Bolshevik leader, creator of the
> Red Army and most powerful figure in the "Soviet" regime except for Lenin.
> Following Lenin's death in 1924, he was gradually outmaneuvered by Stalin,
> forced into exile, and later murdered by one of Stalin's agents.

> Trotsky and Parvus: Leon Trotsky and Alexander Parvus's theory of permanent
> revolution (developed in the aftermath of the 1905 Russian revolution) held
> that it would be possible to proceed from the bourgeois to the proletarian
> stage in one continuous process, going against the previous theory that a
> bourgeois revolution as well as significant capitalist economic development
> was necessary to provide the material basis for the eventual emergence of a
> socialist society.

> 10th Congress: The 10^th^ Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)
> was held during March 8–16^th^, 1921 in Moscow. Halfway through the Congress,
> the Kronstadt uprising started.

> Kronstadt: In March 1921 the sailors of Kronstadt, who had been among the most
> ardent participants in the 1917 revolution, revolted against the Bolshevik
> government, calling for a genuine power of the soviets (democratic popular
> councils) as opposed to the rule of the "Soviet" state. Denounced as
> reactionaries, they were crushed by the Bolsheviks under the direct leadership
> of Trotsky.

> "Workers' Opposition": A radical leftist faction within the Bolshevik Party
> that had its roots in the trade unions that emerged in 1920 as a response to
> the perceived over-bureaucratisation of Soviet Russia. It was led by Alexander
> Shlyapnikov, Alexandra Kollontaĭ, Sergei Medvedev, and Yuri Lutovinov. It
> existed until 1922, when it was defeated at the 11^th^ Congress of the Russian
> Communist Party (Bolsheviks). For more see Kollontaĭ, A. & Holt, A., 1977.

### 104

After the Kronstadt rebellion of 1921, the bureaucracy became the owner of a
system of _state capitalism_—entered into a temporary alliance with the
peasantry with its "New Economic Policy" internally, sabotaging any
revolutionary movements at home, and used the regimented workers of the Third
International to back up Russian diplomacy abroad, supporting the bourgeois
foreign governments such as the Kuomintang in China (the Nationalist Party of
China from 1925-1927), and Popular Fronts in Spain and France, whose support
they expected in return to secure their position in international politics. In
order to complete absolute social control, the Russian bureaucratic party used a
reign of terror against the peasantry to achieve the most brutal primitive
accumulation of capital in history. The industrialization during Stalin's era
revealed the bureaucracies ultimate intentions: to preserve and maintain the
economy as the basis of society, and salvaging all essential aspects of a
capitalist market, especially labor as a commodity. Thus it was demonstrated
that, left independent, the economy recreated the class distinctions necessary
for its own continued operation. The bourgeoisie had created a power so
autonomous that it would continue to endure without the bourgeoisie. This
totalitarian bureaucracy was merely a _substitute ruling class_ for the
commodity economy, and not "the last owning class in history" as Bruno Rizzi had
argued. This class replaced a tottering capitalist property system with a
_concentrated_, centralized, simplified, less diversified, and inferior version
of itself. This class reflected the underdevelopment of the economy at its
foundations, and offered no agenda other than its own development. It was a
cheap hierarchical and statist remake of the capitalist ruling class, staffed by
a party of the working class, but still modelled on the hierarchic bourgeois
organizations. Ante Ciliga put it most succinctly writing from one of Stalin's
prisons: "Technical questions of organization turned out to be social
questions."

> state capitalism: A centralized economy in which the state controls all
> capitalist enterprise.

> "New Economic Policy": A temporary concession (1921-1928) to the peasants that
> included loosening certain aspects of state economic control, eliminating
> forced grain requisitions and permitting the peasants to sell surplus
> production on the open market.

> Third International (a.k.a. Communist International or Comintern): From Knabb,
> "The Third International, ostensibly created by the Bolsheviks to counteract
> the degenerate social-democratic reformism of the Second International and to
> unite the vanguard of the proletariat in 'revolutionary communist parties,'
> was too closely linked to the interests of its founders to ever bring about a
> genuine socialist revolution anywhere. In reality the Third International was
> essentially a continuation of the Second." See Knabb, K., 2006, (Pp. 423) "a
> reign of terror": Primarily through the forced collectivization of the "Five
> Year Plans" during the period of 1928-1941. These plans were lists of economic
> goals under Communist Party General Secretary Joseph Stalin which centered
> around rapid industrialization and the destruction of traditional peasant
> farming plots and ways of life—in order to create massive collective farming
> systems and seismic shifts to cultural norms.

> Bruno Rizzi: Author of what can be considered the first in-depth analysis of
> the class nature of the Soviet Union, see Rizzi, B. & Westoby, A., 1985.

> Ante Ciliga: (1898-1992): Croatian revolutionary imprisoned by Stalin and
> later sent to Siberian labor camps.

### 105

Leninism represents the greatest voluntaristic attempt to the revolutionary
ideology of _coherence of the separate_, an attempt by authoritarianism to
change both reality and society under prevailing conditions. The advent of
Stalinism returned revolutionary ideology to _its fundamental incoherence_ at
which point ideology is no longer a tool and a weapon, but an end in itself. The
lie that is not contradicted becomes insanity. Both reality and ideological
purpose (to transform the basis of reality) is dissolved into a totalitarian
ideology proclaiming that whatever it said is all there is, and all there ever
was. This was an early, local, and primitive form of the spectacle that was fit
for the underdeveloped economy, and yet essential to the emergence and
development of the universal, globalized spectacle. The ideology that emerged
from this context did not actually develop the world economically, as capitalism
had as it reached the stage of material abundance, this ideology merely used
police-state methods and violence to transform the _perception_ of the world.

### 106

The ideological-totalitarian class in power is the power of the world turned on
its head, the stronger the class, the more forcefully it proclaims that it does
not exist, and it uses its strength first and foremost to assert its
non-existence. Its modesty ends there however, as it simultaneously proclaims
its own non-existence it also proclaims nothing exists beyond the current status
quo—the success of the status quo of course due to both the zenith of historic
development and the infallible leadership of the party. The bureaucracy must
always be _invisible as a class_, although always visible, thus forcing all of
social life into a contorted series of lies, self-dilution, contradictions, and
insanity. These social relations organized around contradiction create the
corrupt foundation for the absolute lie.

> "zenith of historic development": Debord uses the Latin phrase "Ne Plus Ultra"
> meaning "the apex of development", or "zenith of development".

> "the absolute lie": I've chosen to translate the original French
> <q lang="fr">mensonge absolu</q> to "absolute lie" and try to remain
> consistent with this phrase. It is an ideology of balanced contradictions that
> obscure the nature of all social relations based on falsehoods.

### 107

Under Stalinism, the bureaucratic ruling class was officially non-existent and
had no legally recognized status as an owning class, nor any juridical
legitimacy to apply to its members. Their power was based on a reign of terror
within the bureaucratic ruling class, and used terror to become the owner of the
proletariat and the ruling class. Its status as an owning class was obscured
because it was based on false consciousness. The false consciousness maintains
its absolute power only through absolute terror, where all true motive is
eventually lost. As members of the (officially non-existent) bureaucratic ruling
class only have a collective control of the ownership of society, they are
participants in-and-reproduce the fundamental lie that forms the basis of the
party: they are merely part of the proletariat, working in common to govern a
socialist society—actors loyal to a script of ideological disloyalty. But
effective performance in this theatrical production of lies requires and
reproduces actual participation. Here lies an essential tension: no bureaucrat
can exert power individually, since to do so would prove their membership in the
bureaucracy, and proving this status is impossible since the bureaucracy's
official policy is its' official non-existence. Thus each bureaucrat is totally
dependent on the _guaranteed stability_ of the ruling ideology, which
legitimates the collective participation in the "socialist regime" of _those
bureaucrats it doesn't eliminate_. While the bureaucrats are collectively
empowered to make all social decisions as long as they are members of the
bureaucratic class, their membership in this class can only be determined by the
concentration of the terrorist power in a single person (that is to say, the
leader: Stalin). In this single person resides the actual truth of the _ruling
lie_: the power to determine unchallengeable party norms which are nevertheless
constantly being adjusted. Thus only Stalin can decide, without appeal, who is a
"proletariat bureaucrat member in power" and who is "a traitor paid by Wall
Street." These separated bureaucrats can only find their collective legitimacy
in the person of Stalin—the lord and master of the world who thus comes to see
himself as the absolute person, for whom no higher type of Spirit exists. "The
lord of the world becomes really conscious of what he is, viz. the universal
power of the actual world, in the destructive power he exercises against the
self of his subjects, the self which stands over against him." Only he can
determine the terrain of political struggle, and he is also "the power that
_ravages_ that terrain".

> "Their power was based on a reign of terror within the bureaucratic ruling
> class": For a wonderfully comedic take on the reign of terror within the
> bureaucratic class, look no further than the 2017 film "The Death of Stalin".

> "the lord and master of the world… for whom no higher type of Spirit exists":
> This phrase echoes Hegel's description of the power of the Roman emperors over
> their subjects. Full quotation "the lord and master of the world holds himself
> in this way to be the absolute person, at the same time embracing within
> himself to be the absolute person, at the same time embracing within himself
> the whole of existence, the person for whom there exists no superior Spirit."
> See Hegel, G.W.F., 1998.

> "The lord of the world becomes…" Ibid.

### 108

The party in power demands total adherence to their ideological vision, and all
reality must be mediated by their ideology, or else. This ideology presents
itself as the only way to perceive reality, as no perspective otherwise exists.
This dogmatic perspective must continually shift and contort reality itself to
fit its absolute perspective, and in doing so creates the "absolute lie" that
must be accepted, and thus any assertion can be rendered true when based upon
its false premises. Under such a regime, empirical facts and history can no
longer exist without contorting to the demands of this "ideology of the absolute
lie." This lie rewrites history as needed to create an unchanging perpetual
present, under which lives the totalitarian society, where everything up to this
point justifies and is accessible only to its police force, who are ready to
amend, or change, or enforce the history it demands. Napoleon had formulated a
similar project, that of "monarchically directing the energy of memory"—or
rewriting the past to serve the interests of the present, and not just
reinterpreting the meaning of the past, but in changing the facts of the past
themselves. There is a price to be paid for this "emancipation" from the facts
of historical reality however, which is the loss of any rational orientation
which is necessary for capitalism to maintain its status as a _historical_
social system. Lysenkoism in Stalinist Russia is a perfect example of an insane
and irrational ideology extended to its dreadful ends. Totalitarian bureaucracy
is challenged by internal contradictions in that it needs science and
rationality to be effective, but refuses to accept a reality it doesn't agree
with. This is its primary shortcoming when compared to rationality under
capitalist development. The management of agriculture and industrialized society
cannot function under falsehoods, ultimately it seeks to plan in an
authoritarian manner on the basis of a complete falsification of reality and a
dogmatic adherence to the absolute lie.

> "monarchically directing the energy of memory": From the French quote by
> Napoleon, in conversation with General de Caulaincourt:
> <q lang="fr">L'important est de diriger monarchiquement l'énergie des
> souvenirs, viola la seule histoire.</q> See Caulaincourt, 2002 (Pp. 153).

> Lysenkoism: Lysenkoism was an anti-scientific political campaign by Trofim
> Lysenko, a former agronomist who claimed to have developed an agricultural
> technique named "vernalization", which tripled or quadrupled crop yield by
> exposing wheat seed to high humidity and low temperature, and these
> characteristics would be inheritable by the offspring of these plants. These
> findings were never reproduced by western scientists. Joseph Stalin supported
> the campaign. More than 3,000 mainstream biologists were fired or even sent to
> prison, and numerous scientists were executed as part of a campaign instigated
> by Lysenko to suppress his scientific opponents.

### 109

Between the two world wars, the revolutionary workers movements were destroyed,
in Russia by the Stalinist bureaucracy and in Germany by the fascist
totalitarians who had borrowed their organizational form from the more developed
totalitarian party in Russia. Fascism was an extreme defense mechanism for the
bourgeois economy which was threatened at the time by working class subversion
and the reparations of the Germans after World War I. Fascism is an expensive to
maintain _state of siege_ by the capitalist economy attempting to defend itself
with an emergency dose of rationalization and massive state intervention in its
economic and social management. But this rationalization is itself hindered by
the immense irrationality of the methods it imposed. Fascism rallies to the
defense of the conservative bourgeois ideology of the family, private property,
the moral order, and patriotic nationalism. It unites the petty-bourgeois and
the unemployed who have been hurt by the crisis or disappointed by the impotence
of the socialist revolution—it is not by its nature fundamentally ideological,
but may exhibit ideology to suit its needs. Its strength is how it presents
itself truthfully as a violent resurrection of _mythic_ origins—to claim the
past as a "Golden Age" and a return to the successes of this golden past. It
demands participation in a community held together by mythical archaic
pseudo-values: race, blood, and the leader. Fascism is a _cult of the archaic
fitted out by modern technology_. It revives and recreates its myth (both past
and present) through the spectacle using speeches, television, radio, internet,
and pop culture. It is a major factor in the formation of the modern spectacle.
The false mythology of this "Golden Age" is one of the fundamental factors of
contemporary society, and was a primary factor in the destruction of the workers
movement. Fascism however, is the most _costly_ means of preserving a capitalist
order due to the scale and effort required of the state to enforce the
authoritarian rule of a minority with a police state apparatus. Fascism is
unsustainable in the long-term, and must be pushed aside by a more efficient and
rational form of power (neoconservative or neoliberal representational democracy
being examples).

> "… reparations of the Germans": As a result of World War I, the Paris Peace
> Conference imposed reparations on Germany (and the other Central Powers)
> following their defeat in the First World War by the Allied and Associate
> Powers. The German people saw reparations as a national humiliation; the
> German government worked to undermine the validity of the Treaty of Versailles
> and the requirement to pay.

> petty-bourgeoisie: A social class comprising small business owners, and the
> middle class whose personal identities are determined by an aspiration to the
> upper class bourgeoisie. Their political and economic positions tend to
> imitate the positions of the bourgeoisie class above them, although this
> position is often not in their own best interests.

> "Fascism however, is the most costly means…": Debord is alluding to the direct
> and expensive form of authoritarian-totalitarian enforcement of false
> spectacular consciousness he terms "The Concentrated Spectacle". This form is
> less effective and more costly than the other variants of spectacular
> society—"The Diffuse Spectacle", in which individuals willingly participate in
> a society that is both far more effective and efficient at subduing the
> masses, since it appears to empower individuals through consumer choice. The
> diffuse spectacle of contemporary capitalism reproduces itself by exploiting
> the spectator's desires and dissatisfaction with an endless cycle of promises
> to satiate these desires and then failing to do so; and yet offers another
> promise.

### 110

Russia eventually reached a point in its development where it had successfully
seized all private property which had hampered the communist parties control of
the economy. It had developed this property for the benefit of the party, and
had received recognition worldwide by the great powers. Russia wanted to enjoy
the tranquility of its powerful place in the world without any constraints (both
internal and external), thus it began to denounce the Stalinism at its origin,
to forge a new path forward unencumbered by its past. This denunciation had to
remain fundamentally Stalinist, arbitrary, unexplained and continually corrected
because _the absolute lie at its origins could never be revealed_. Under such
constraints, the party bureaucracy cannot truly liberalize culturally or
politically because the party's existence depends on its monopoly over ideology
as the only property it holds title to. Ideology has certainly lost the passion
of its positive affirmation, but what remains of its indifferent triviality
still has the repressive function of prohibiting the slightest competition, of
holding the totality of thought captive. With the shift away from Stalinism,
there was a corresponding loss of the passion that swelled within Stalinism; all
that remains is a hollowed-out and indifferent bureaucracy which serves only to
suppress competition from any other party or ideology, and claims to be the
authority of all existing political and cultural thought. Thus the bureaucracy
has become bound to an ideology that is no longer believed by anyone, and all
original passions have been stripped away. Where the party once inspired fear,
now those same tactics inspire laughter (although a sort of gallows humor, under
which the fear still lurks.) It is when the bureaucracy tries to demonstrate its
superiority on the terrain of capitalism when it exposes itself as a _bad
knockoff_ of capitalism. Just as its actual history contradicts its current
reality, and its stubborn adherence to ignorance and falsehoods about reality
contradict its scientific pretensions; so does its project of becoming a viable
competitor to commodity capitalism contradict the very fact that a capitalist
society of abundance is pregnant with an _implicit ideology_ itself: an extended
freedom to choose from a spectacular set of false alternatives, a pseudo-freedom
which is irreconcilable with the bureaucratic ideology of the party.

> This thesis presciently described the collapse of the USSR twenty two years
> before it occured.

> "… denounce the Stalinism at its origin…": De-Stalinization was a series of
> political reforms in the Soviet Union after the death of Stalin in 1953 and
> the rise of Nikita Khrushchev. It was started with a secret internal report to
> the Twentieth Party Congress in 1956 entitled "On the Cult of Personality and
> Its Consequences" which denounced Stalin as an individual who succumbed to
> paranoia and megalomania but never questioned the system which enabled his
> excesses. The reforms recommended changing or removing key institutions that
> helped Stalin hold power: the cult of personality that surrounded him, the
> Stalinist political system, the release of many people from concentration
> camps, loosening of censorship, all of which had been created by Stalin. The
> superficial nature of the campaign was revealed later the same year when
> Khrushchev sent Russian tanks to crush the Hungarian revolution.

> "its monopoly on ideology as the only property it holds title to.": To
> liberalize control of cultural or political ideology is to question its very
> legitimacy to power, as ideology is the only thing the party really controls.

> "an ideology that is no longer believed by anyone": For an in-depth
> examination of the collapse in belief of Soviet ideology, see Curtis, A. 2016.

### 111

At this point in the development of the bureaucracy's ideological title to
property is already collapsing on an international scale. The party's nationally
established power, presented as a model for international rule, must admit that
it can no longer impose its system of lies beyond its national borders. The
unequal economic development between the "socialist" countries has forced the
public confrontation between versions of the absolute lie—the Russian lie or the
Chinese lie? This makes it clear that any post-Stalinist bureaucracy in power,
and any totalitarian party aspiring to power, will have to develop its own way
to deal with the internal contradictions it has constructed. The dissolution and
failure of the international bureaucracy exhibited its first visible symptoms of
internal negation, when the workers in East Berlin revolted against the
bureaucrats—demanding a "government of steel workers." These actions spread to
Hungary, where workers successfully established sovereign workers councils. In
the final analysis, the collapse and failure of global alliances between
bureaucratic parties is an unfavorable aspect of the development of capitalist
society. The global bourgeoisie (both the privately wealthy as well as large
trans-national corporations) was in danger of losing their only viable
opposition—a global union of the workers parties that objectively supported
them—which was seemingly breaking apart all global alliances at the very moment
of their peak development. This spectacular division of labor between two
symbiotic aspects of the spectacle was coming to an end when their
pseudo-revolutionary role was divided. The spectacular element of the
dissolution of the workers' movement will itself be dissolved.

> "public confrontation between versions of the absolute lie...": This thesis is
> largely based on the Situationist essay _The Explosion Point of Ideology in
> China_, a relevant quote pertaining to this line is "The accelerating
> decomposition of bureaucratic ideology, as evident in the countries where
> Stalinism has seized power as in the others where it has lost every chance of
> seizing it, naturally began around issues of internationalism." See Knabb, K.,
> 2006 (Pp. 240-241)

> "workers of East Berlin": A reference to the East German uprising of 1953 by
> construction workers against the party; eventually crushed.

> "actions spread to Hungary": The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 was organized by
> a network of nationally coordinated workers councils. Eventually Soviet forces
> moved in and crushed the revolution, leading to a suppression of revolutionary
> action and a split that alienated Western Marxists and considerable losses of
> membership for communist parties.

> "The spectacular element of the dissolution of the workers' movement will
> itself be dissolved": In his _Preface to the Third French Edition of The
> Society of the Spectacle_ (see Debord, G. Nicholson-Smith, D., 1994), Debord
> noted that the failure of the workers movement had rapidly accelerated since
> the "fall of the Berlin Wall" in 1989; a point also taken by Francis Fukuyama
> in his book _The End of History and The Last Man_, in which he also argues
> that capitalism no longer has an oppositional ideology. See Fukuyama,
> F., 2006.

### 112

With the exemption of some Trotskyist tendencies, Leninism no longer has any
solid foundations. It's stubborn insistence on an ideologically based and rigid
hierarchical organization despite all the historical experiences that have
refuted these practices. Trotskyism is able to succeed in its revolutionary
critique of present day society by maintaining a differential attitude towards
ideological and tactical positions already proven false when they were used in
real struggle. Trotsky was fundamentally loyal to the high bureaucracy until
1927, seeking to capture it to resume a properly Bolshevik foreign policy
externally (he went as far as to slander his own supporter Max Eastman in order
to hide the criticism against him, contained within Lenin's famous "Testament".)
Trotsky was doomed by his underlying perspective, for as soon as the bureaucracy
realized its actions were counterrevolutionary on the domestic front, it had to
become _similarly counterrevolutionary_ on the international front (of course,
in the name of the revolution at home.) Trotsky's subsequent efforts to create
the Fourth International contained the same inconsistency. During the second
Russian revolution, Trotsky became an unconditional believer in the Bolshevik
style of bureaucratic organization, and from then on refused to acknowledge that
the bureaucracy itself had become the new ruling class, a separate class apart
from the working class. In 1923 Lukács pointed to the Bolshevik style of
organization as the middle way between theory and practice, where the working
class are no longer mere "spectators" of events inside their organization, but
consciously choose and live these events as participants; here what he was
describing as the merits of the Bolshevik party were in fact everything that the
party was _not_. Despite his profound theoretical work, Lukács was an ideologist
promoting a power not actually available to the workers movement, and instead
most grossly held by the bureaucratic class, he both believed and pretended that
it was, and that he was _completely comfortable with it_. Subsequent events
proved otherwise, as the aforementioned power repudiated and eliminated its
servants; Lukács ended up repudiating everything he identified with and argued
for in his prior work, _History and Class Consciousness_—instead identifying
with _the opposite_ and thus making a caricature of himself in the process.
Lukàcs best verifies the essential heuristic that judges all the intellectuals
of this century: that which they _respect_ is that which is able to precisely
measure their own _contemptible reality_. Lenin however was under no such
allusions, he realized the party and the philosophies of its members were always
one and the same, agreeing that "a political organisation cannot put its members
through an examination to see if there is no contradiction between their views
and the Party program." The party whose idolized image Lukacs had so
inopportunely drawn was coherent and precise on one task only—the seizure of
state power.

> "Max Eastman… 'Testament'": The famous _Testament_ was a letter written by
> Lenin for the Russian Communist Party during his illness in December 1922,
> stating his views on how the regime should proceed following his death. The
> letter featured a sharp attack on Stalin's brutality and deceitfulness and
> urged his removal from the position of General Secretary of the Party. It also
> criticized Trotsky's bureaucratic tendencies. The _Testament_ was suppressed
> by the Stalinists and only officially acknowledged much later in 1956 by
> Khrushchev.

> Fourth International: An international alliance of Trotskyist parties founded
> in 1938 as an alternative to the Stalinist Third International. The original
> French text is written as "IV^e^ Internationale."

> "During the second Russian revolution…": the first being in 1905, the second
> in 1917. During the first revolution Trotsky maintained an independent
> position between the Mensheviks and Bolsheviks. In 1917 he supported the
> Bolshevik Party.

> "In 1923 Lukács": Debord is referring to the last chapter of _History and
> Class Consciousness_ section "Towards a Methodology of the Problem of
> Organization."

> "a political organisation cannot put its members through an examination to see
> if there is no contradiction between their views and the Party program":
> Quotation from Lenin, V., 1909.

### 113

The success of contemporary capitalist society reveals the failure and
contradictions apparent in the Trotskyist societies (rebranded as Neo-Leninist.)
Neo-Leninism understandably gets the attention of corrupt governments in
"underdeveloped" states, where the pseudo-socialist ruling classes present
nothing more than the _ideology of economic development_. These states are
forced by their status into maneuvering along the spectrum of the two global
opposites: bureaucratic capitalism (e.g. China) and bourgeois capitalism (e.g.
the U.S.) along with making cultural compromises to satisfy their social base
(notably in Islamic states.) These ideologically compromised states end up
stripping all fundamental aspects of socialism except the police. China, for
example, established its bureaucratic power when an agrarian peasant revolt was
used to enforce a Stalinist model of industrialization on a society even less
economically advanced than Russia in 1917. Egypt is a good example of the petty
bourgeoisie (specifically a group of army officers) seizing power by force and
going on to industrialize the nation. Algeria, following its war of independence
against France is a good example of a para-state bureaucracy that was able to
run a middle campaign compromising with a weak national bourgeoisie. Finally, in
Africa amongst the former European and American colonies that are still
economically dependent on the former colonizer, we see tribal leaders who
constitute themselves as a local bourgeoisie with a _seizure of the state_.
While economic imperialism still controls the economy, the former colonizer
allows the state to maintain the appearance of local autonomy and independence,
but this is an independence from the local masses and lacks any independence
from imperialism. This superficial autonomy is awarded to the local ruling class
who continue to sell natural resources and labor to the former colonizers. This
artificially subsidized bourgeoisie is never able to accumulate real capital as
it _squanders_ its two main sources of surplus value: local labor and the
foreign subsidies it receives from foreign protector states and transnational
monopolies. This artificial bourgeoisie is incapable of fulfilling the necessary
economic functions of a government, and thus will always face opposition
movements trying to seize their position and power. These movements are
organized on the bureaucratic model taken from socialist or communist origins,
but adapted to local myths and conditions. A successful bureaucratic movement
with the goal of industrializing the economy entails its own defeat: a
bureaucracy of the bourgeois, through the accumulation of capital transforms the
proletariat into members of a wealthy bourgeoisie, eventually eliminating the
proletariat, and negating themselves in the process.

> Egypt: The Egyptian revolution of 1952 started by the Free Officers Movement,
> a group of army officers led by Mohammed Naguib and Gamal Abdel Nasser. The
> society underwent complete agrarian reform, and huge industrialisation
> programs were initiated in the first decade, leading to an unprecedented
> period of infrastructure building, and urbanization. The revolutionary
> government adopted a staunchly nationalist, anti-imperialist agenda, which
> came to be expressed chiefly through Arab nationalism, and international
> non-alignment.

> Algeria: The Algerian war of independence was fought between France and the
> Algerian National Liberation Front from 1954 to 1962, which led to Algeria
> gaining its independence from France. An important decolonization war, it was
> a complex conflict characterized by guerrilla warfare and the use of torture.

### 114

Over the course of the complex and terrible evolution of the conditions of late
capitalism, the proletariat has lost its ability to assert its own independence
amongst industrialized nations. The failures of the workers movements of the
20^th^ century caused the proletariat to drop their _illusions_ to class
struggle, and yet have not been eliminated as a class within society. The
proletariat still exists but under the increasing alienation of late capitalism,
a great majority who have lost the ability to determine how their labor—and
lives are used by capital. _Once they realize this_, they must necessarily
redefine themselves as the recreation of a new proletariat, after the death of
the industrial proletariat sprouts the proletariat of late capitalism, which
exhibits the Marxist law of negation: the force to negate this society from
within. The proletariat is objectively strengthened by the virtual elimination
of the peasantry and by an extension of the logic of the factory system: as the
peasantry disappeared into the factory worker, so too did the factory workers
negate themselves into "service workers" and "knowledge workers".
_Subjectively_, the new proletariat is unaware of their class consciousness,
unable to recognize their membership within this new class, which spans across
regions, factories, services, and knowledge industries; few understand the
impotence and deceptions of liberal politics to improve their conditions. This
new proletariat will eventually discover that its representatives in government,
unions, political parties, and even the state power it claimed for the purpose
of emancipating itself merely works against itself to reproduce capitalism. The
class will discover through concrete historical experience that it is a class
opposed to all forms of external representation, the technocratic power of
specialists, and politicians. This proletariat must become the bearer of a
revolutionary force that critiques all forms of class separation, advocating for
a unified, unspecialized, integrated class of integrated difference _that cannot
leave anything outside itself_. The proletariat must assume an organizational
form that is adequate to these tasks. It is not possible to reform society to
fix the dissatisfaction of the proletariat, no welfare state or program, no jobs
guarantee, no universal basic income, no reparations, no integration of the
classes, or the abolishment of hierarchic power structures, or the _righting of
any wrongs_—because the entirety as a multitude will not recognize these reforms
as an amelioration of their place in society, nor does the multitude consider
itself to have even suffered any of these wrongs. The _absolute wrong_ the
entirety of the multitude recognizes is having been excluded from participating
in the events of their own lives.

> "factory workers negate themselves into 'service workers' and 'knowledge
> workers'": The original French is <q lang="fr">«services» et des professions
> intellectuelles</q> or "'services' and intellectual professions" but i've
> updated the text with more contemporary terms.

> "the entirety as a multitude…": 'multitude' is a term for a group of people
> who cannot be classed under any distinct category, except for their shared
> fact of existence with or without overlapping interests. This concept is
> defined in detail by political theorists Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri in
> _Empire_ (2000) and _Multitude: War and Democracy in the Age of Empire_
> (2004). I've used that term here as Hardt and Negri have acknowledged that
> influence.

> "having been excluded from participating in the events of their own lives.":
> The original French is <q lang="fr">le tort absolu d'être rejeté en marge de
> la vie.</q> or more elegantly translated as "the absolute wrong of being cast
> to the margins of life." I've decided to use the term "the events of their own
> lives" to remain more consistent with my translations of _V. Time and History_
> and _VI. Spectacular Time_ where Debord elaborates on alienation from
> participation in the events of one's own life.

### 115

We can conclude that a new period has already begun, when amongst the
economically advanced countries we see increasing signs of negation. We
witnessed first failures against capitalism with the workers movements from 1905
through the 1930s, now we are witnessing the _failure of capitalist abundance_.
We are witnessing a new spontaneous struggle on two fronts, namely the
suppression of the workers struggle against capital, largely suppressed by the
labor unions, and simultaneously protest by the youth that is still unorganized,
untargeted, and abstract—against art, everyday life, and the old world of
liberal and specialized and technocratic politics. The first symptoms of this
struggle appear as _criminal_ behavior: theft, vandalism, riots, piracy, etc.
These symptoms are the harbingers of a second proletariat assault on class
society. When these _lost boys_ enter the battlefield of class struggle (which
has changed and yet stays the same), they will have a new "General Ludd" at the
vanguard, leading them to attack the _machinery of permitted consumption_.

> "increasing signs of negation / the failure of capitalist abundance": Even
> under conditions of objective material abundance and relative affluence, we
> experience artificial impoverishment and a continual desire to _BUY MORE!_ in
> order to satisfy continually disappointed desires. Spectacular society
> falsifies our needs into thinking we need to buy things we don't need, to
> become more like the model-people we see in celebrities but who we don't
> actually need to imitate. Simultaneously, objective material abundance is
> increasingly diminished as wealth is funneled to a shrinking group of
> oligarchs.

> "lost boys": Original French: <q lang="fr">enfants perdus</q> or "lost
> children"; an old military term for soldiers or scouts assigned to
> particularly dangerous or suicidal missions; by extension, people who are on
> the extreme cutting edge of a movement. Debord used this term, with its
> multiple evocative associations in many of his works.

> "General Ludd": Ned Ludd, possibly born Edward Ludlam, mythic leader of The
> Luddites, a secret oath-based organization of English textile workers in the
> 19^th^ century, a radical faction which destroyed textile machinery as a form
> of protest against increasing mechanization. Over time, the term "Luddite" has
> come to mean one opposed to industrialisation, automation, computerisation, or
> new technologies in general.

> "machinery of permitted consumption": This is to say, to attack advertising,
> brands, and the mass market industry that creates the pseudo-needs and desires
> to consume; an attack on the _industry of artificial impoverishment_ itself.

### 116

The 20^th^ century had finally discovered that "Long-sought political form
through which the working class could carry out its own economic liberation" in
the Revolutionary Workers Councils. This form vests all decision making and
executive powers within the councils themselves, decentralized and yet federated
amongst one another through the exchange of delegates answerable to their base,
and recallable at any moment. The workers council form had only a brief and
experimental existence; thus far their emergence has resulted in attack and
eventual defeat by a number of tactics used by the ruling class, as well due to
false consciousness within the councils themselves. As Antonie Pannekoek
correctly stated, the decision to set up workers councils does not provide
solutions for the workers as much as it "poses problems". But that power is
precisely the site where the problems of the revolution of the proletariat can
find real solutions. The power of the worker councils is the only context in
which the objective conditions of the historical consciousness of the
proletariat revolution can truly be understood, contextualized, analyzed, and
ultimately solved. It is at these councils that realize active direct
communication, where specialization, hierarchy and separation end, and where an
understanding of the objective conditions of their subjugation under capital can
be made readily apparent, and thus vulnerable to strategy and resistance. It is
here where the conditions of the status quo are transformed into "conditions of
unity" amongst all workers as a unified multitude. It is here where the
proletarian subject emerges from a purely contemplative role of resistance to a
lived and practical organization that is both revolutionary in thought and in
action—one in which their consciousness is equal to the practical organization
they have given themselves, because this consciousness has become inseparable
from their coherent participation in the historical events of their lives.

> "The long-sought political form…" Marx's characterization of the Paris
> Commune, see Marx, K. & Kemp, A., 1968.

> Antonie Pannekoek: (1873-1960) Dutch revolutionary, author of _Workers'
> Councils_ (1947).

> "conditions of unity": Full quote "Its organization is, therefore, essentially
> economic, the material production of the conditions of this unity: it turns
> existing conditions into conditions of unity", see Marx, K. & Engels,
> F., 1998.

### 117

It is the power of the workers councils, which must replace any existing powers
internationally, such that this movement is its own product, and the product is
nothing other than the producers themselves. The movement is to itself its own
goal, its own self fulfillment and self-actualization. Only in this way can the
spectacle and its ability to create separation, alienation, and hierarchy—the
very negation of life itself, be negated.

> "This product is nothing other than the producers themselves": Another
> détournement from Hegel, full quote "But since they draw it from within
> themselves, from a source which was not previously available, they appear to
> derive it from themselves alone; and the new world order and the deeds they
> accomplish appear to be their own achievement, their personal interest and
> creation", see Hegel, G., Hoffmeister, J., Nisbet, H. & Forbes, D., 1975.

### 118

The emergence of the workers council movements during the first quarter of the
20^th^ century was the most advanced development of the proletariat movement.
This achievement has been ignored, or explained away as the workers movements
collapsed and were ultimately destroyed. A final analysis of the proletariat
movement however, reveals the workers councils as the only battle victory in the
lost war for the workers movement. Those who are aware of the history of the
workers struggle are now more conscious than ever: the councils are the
distributed center of a new rising power, not a subsiding power.

### 119

A revolutionary organization which exists before the establishment of the
workers councils can only find its appropriate organizational form through
struggle. History has made it clear that any council cannot claim to _represent_
the working class. The emergent workers council representative organization must
recognize itself as radically outside any pre-existing aspects of spectacular or
already-existing radical society. Its task is to promote a radical separation
from the _world of separation_.

### 120

The revolutionary organization is a coherent expression of theory alongside
practical struggles which put theory into practice. It is thus a process of
practical theory: theory immediately put into practice, and theory validated by
practice. Its own practice is to foster the two-way communication and coherence
of these struggles. In the revolutionary event of the dissolution of social
separation, this organization must dissolve itself as a separate organization.

### 121

The revolutionary councils organization must offer a comprehensive, integrated
critique of every aspect of spectacular society (e.g. ecological, economic,
technological, sociological.) The critique must address issues both locally and
globally, and must refuse to compromise with any forms of separated, alienated,
and spectacular life. The weapon in the struggle between class society and the
combatants from the revolutionary organization is the _very nature of the
revolutionary combatants themselves_: that is to say, the revolutionary
organizations absolute resistance to any members specialization, or the
promotion of a technocratic or meritocratic elite, and the separation of
factions and divisions across hierarchy: their way of life is the weapon. They
must constantly struggle to defend against their own deformation into the ideal
form as exerted upon by the spectacular society. The revolutionary organization
has a total democracy, universal participation and little representation, and
the only requirement for participants is their adoption of the integrated and
total critique of spectacular society, and their right to appropriate and extend
this critique. This critique must be applied both in theory and practice, and
only in the relationship between theory and practice does the critique remain
coherent.

> "the very nature of the revolutionary combatants themselves": C.f. Hegel,
> G., 1998. Full quotation: "What will be the outcome of this conflict itself,
> what virtue learns from it, whether, by the sacrifice it makes of itself, the
> 'way of the world' succumbs while virtue triumphs—this must be decided by the
> nature of the living weapons borne by the combatants. For the nature of the
> living weapons are nothing else but the _nature_ of the combatants themselves,
> a nature which only makes its appearance for both of them reciprocally."

> "only in the relationship between theory and practice does the critique remain
> coherent": This is all to say, the essence of revolutionary life is to develop
> a theory of life outside spectacular life, and then to live that life.

### 122

As capitalism continues to expand, creating an ever specialized workforce
increasingly alienated from their lives, it becomes increasingly difficult for
workers to recognize, name, and struggle against their own impoverishment.
Eventually, workers will be in a position where they must reject that
impoverishment _in its totality or not at all_. It is here that the
revolutionary organization can no longer fight alienation by fighting the
individual symptoms of alienation. _The revolutionary organization must fight
the integrated whole of spectacular society with integrated tactics_.

> "can no longer fight alienation by fighting the individual symptoms of
> alienation… tactics": I've significantly reworded here, but the original
> French <q lang="fr">l'organisation révolutionnaire a dû apprendre qu'elle ne
> peut plus combattre l'aliénation sous des formes aliénées.</q> or more
> directly "the revolutionary organization has had to learn that it can no
> longer fight alienation in alienated forms." This is a détournement of Hegel,
> G. & Sibree, J., 2004 (Pp. 407), full quotation: "The Church fought the battle
> with the violence of rude sensuality in a temper equally wild and terroristic
> with that of its antagonist."

### 123

The proletarian revolution is predicated entirely on the requirement that, for
the first time, theory is no longer proscriptive to practice, instead, theory is
an annotation of understanding of the human experience as directly lived by the
masses. This revolution demands workers become dialecticians capable of
synthesizing these perspectives into a coherent theory and practice. This
revolution demands more of its participants (the 'men without qualities') than
previous revolutions had asked even of its leaders that the revolution had put
into power (seeing as those leaders were from the bourgeois classes who already
had the qualifications to run the economy, and who were largely already in
control of economic life.) It is thus the development of class society into a
spectacle representing the organization of all non-lived life that inspires and
eventually obliges the revolutionary project to be _recognized_ for what it
_essentially already was_: the organization and practice of the lived experience
of daily life.

> "men without qualities": An allusion to Robert Musil's novel _The Man Without
> Qualities_.

### 124

Revolutionary theory is now the sworn enemy of all revolutionary ideology—_and
it knows it_.
