::::: {.chapter}

## V. Time & History {title="Time & History"}

> _"O, gentlemen, the time of life is short!… And if we live, we live to tread
> on kings."_
>
> —Shakespeare, _Henry IV_ (Part I)

:::::

::::: {.chapter-body}

### 125

Man, "the negative being who _is_ solely to the extent that he suppresses Being"
is identical with time[
  "Man... is identical with time": see Papaioannou, K. 1962. Possibly taken from
  Papaioannou, who is referencing and interpreting Hegel, but Debord may have
  taken the phrase directly from one of Hegel's works.
]{#fn125.1 .sidenote}.
"History is itself[
  "History is itself…": C.f. from Marx's _1844 Manuscripts_, Marx, K. Engels,
  F. 1988.
]{#fn125.2 .sidenote}
a real part of _natural history_, and
of the transformation of nature into man" (Marx, K. Engels, F. 1988). Man's
self-determination of our own nature is at the same time our understanding of
the development of the universe[
  "our understanding of the development of the universe": Humanity perceives our
  place in the universe in the negative, in that we define our existence only by
  denying our existence as part of the whole. This is man's general definition
  of time itself, as something apart from the singular time/space duality of the
  universe. This definition of time says much about the nature of
  humanity—displaying at the same time an unease and apprehension with the
  unfolding of the universe that operates independently of mankind.
]{#fn125.3 .sidenote}.
This "natural history" has no actual existence
other than via the process of human history, which continually reaches into
time, into the past in order to recreate it, like a telescope whose sight
reaches back _in time_ to the creation of nebulae at the periphery of the
universe. History has always existed[
  "History has always existed..." C.f. _Marx's Letter to Ruge_: "Reason has
  always existed, but not always in its rational form." See Marx, K. 1843,
  September.
]{#fn125.4 .sidenote},
but not in its historical form. The
mediation of society produces the temporalization of humanity, and conversely
produces an equivalent humanization of time. The unconscious progression of time
only manifests itself and becomes _true_ within humanity's creation of
historical consciousness.

### 126

The concept of history is born out of the actions of human society. As human
society emerged, it slowly developed language and technology, forming the
intangible "real nature of man"[
  "real nature of man", "nature that is born with human history…": C.f. "Private
  Property and Communism" section of Marx's 1844 Manuscripts. See Marx, K.
  Engels, F. 1988.
]{#fn126.1 .sidenote},
the "nature that is born with human history,
out of the generative action of human society", that is, a human society that is
the product of their own historical actions. But a society that has mastered
language and is technologically advanced is already the product of its own
history, and is only conscious of a perpetual present. In this perpetual
present, all knowledge is confined in the memory of the oldest members of
society, and carried on by the _living_. Neither death nor birth is considered
to be constrained or influenced by time. Time is motionless, unchanging, and
without progression, an enclosed space. When a more complex society finally
achieves consciousness of time, its project is to deny or reject it, seeing time
not as something moving past, but of something returning. The static society
organizes time according to its immediate experience of nature, in the model of
_cyclical time_.

### 127

Nomadic societies experienced cyclical time as the dominant framework for their
understanding of time because they confronted naturally cyclical conditions,
repeated along every moment of their journey. Hegel noted: "the wandering of
nomads is merely a formal one, because it is limited to uniform spaces."[
  "the wandering of nomads…": See Hegel, G. 1975.
]{#fn127.1 .sidenote}—that is
to say, they don't stay around long enough to impact or change their
environment, so they don't differentiate between "our cultivated land" versus
purely new lands: all lands are undifferentiated and therefore uniform. Once
agriculture began, communities invested labor into the land, imbuing content to
the local area, fixing the community to the land, and therefore enclosing the
community within cultivated lands, surrounded by a differentiated region of
uncultivated lands. There is a shift from the nomadic time-oriented cycle
returning people to undifferentiated but similar places, giving way to the
agrarian perception of the return of a set of gestures (planting, harvesting,
etc) in time, attached to a single place. The transition from pastoral nomadism
to settled agriculture marked the end of an idle and unattached freedom, and the
beginning of labor. The agrarian mode of production is governed by the rhythm of
the seasons, and as such is the basis of cyclical time in its fullest
development. Eternity is _within_ this time, it is the return of the same above
as it is here on Earth. Myth is the single frame of thought that conforms the
whole cosmic order around the order that this society has already achieved
within its own differentiated frontiers.

### 128

The social appropriation of time and the production of humanity by means of
labor develops into a society divided into classes. Prior to classed society,
time was external to society, so as to be outside the reach of appropriation.
Within the agrarian society of cyclical time, the class that organized its
social labor built itself a power on the basis of the accumulation of wealth,
and the impoverishment of the laboring class by the appropriation of the limited
surplus value which was extracted from their labor. This class also appropriated
the _temporal surplus value_ that was the result of the organization of
irreversible social time[
  "irreversible social time": Debord introduces the term <q lang="fr">le temps
  irréversible du vivant</q>—the "irreversible time of life" for the first time.
  He frequently returns to this term throughout the text. Historical history
  presupposes the prospect of irreversible and endless economic development; it
  is linked to the production of surplus value, control of this value in the
  form of capital, and to the political management of the economic power that
  results. Alternately rendered as "irreversible time of the living" in
  translations by Knabb, 2014 and Nicholson-Smith, 1994.
]{#fn128.1 .sidenote}.
Thus this class had the sole possession over how time
was used and allocated: the irreversible time of the living. The wealth
accumulated by this class was expended on lavish feasts and festivals[
  lavish feasts and festivals: These were a precursor to the Bread & Circuses of
  the Roman Empire. The term comes from Juvenal, a Roman poet active in the
  Second Century AD. The phrase is a critique of the political class who deliver
  not public services or policy, but instead public diversions, distractions, or
  other means of appeasing the populace with trivial or base appeals to
  amusement or other simple pleasures that make no lasting change or
  improvements to society. See Graeber, D., 2011.
]{#fn128.2 .sidenote}, as well
as squandering _historical time at society's surface_. This class, owning the
surplus value of both labor and time, were the only ones to be in a position to
have knowledge of, and experience the enjoyment of directly lived events[
  "directly lived events": Debord uses the term <q lang="fr">événements
  vécus</q> or "lived events". In the city, those who participate in the "lived
  events" of history are not necessarily the ones who direct them. They
  participate in, and spectate upon what is essentially a conflict over power.
  It may be considered that the people of whom Debord speaks is the one who at
  the same time is deprived of an ability to direct the historical events as
  they occur; yet they are the ones who make the events of history possible.
  (Fabbri, 2008) But these events are part of a story that is not their own;
  that is to say, they are mere spectators, alienated from directing the most
  important events that define their lives.
]{#fn128.3 .sidenote}.
Historical time flows independently and above its own community of workers,
separated from the social organization of time—as it is associated with labor
and the reproduction of social life. (Thus there is a difference between
commodified social time and the historical time—historical time being the
recorded series of events as recorded by kings, queens, and rulers describing a
narrative of their own lives and conquests.) Historical time is the official
time of adventures and wars, the time from which the rulers of cyclical society
pursue their personal histories; it is the same time that is contested in
clashes between foreign states. Historical time is thus alien to ordinary
individuals, something they don't seek out and something from which they had
thought they were protected from. This history revives the negative
_restlessness_ (the need to move) of the people who have been temporarily asleep
during the development of agrarian social forms of living.

### 129

Cyclical time was a period without conflict[
  "a period without conflict": Compared to historical time, where kings and
  masters write their own history, a history measured by procession of their
  conflicts; cyclical time is not measured by people, but by the recurring cycle
  of nature.
]{#fn129.1 .sidenote}.
Yet even this immature conception
of history contains conflict: history struggled to become history by the
adventures, conquests, and writing of the masters of society. This history
creates a superficial irreversibility that consumes infinite cyclical time to
construct finite historical time, expanding and constructing that time in the
process.

### 130

The "frozen societies" are those that have successfully slowed down the rate of
change within society, maintaining conflict within both human and natural arenas
and keeping internal oppositions and conflict in an even, constant equilibrium.
The vast diversity of institutions set up to maintain this constant equilibrium
is ample evidence of the flexibility of human nature to invent itself. The
eloquence of these institutions is only visible to an outside observer, an
anthropologist _looking back_ at what has been built, as filtered and influenced
by historical time. The "frozen society" has a definitive organizational
structure that is excluded from change. It identifies and limits all human
social practice, and demands absolute conformity, there are no external limits
to these practices other than the general fear of falling into a formless animal
condition—the state of nature. Thus, in order for humanity to remain human, we
are forced to remain the same.

### 131

There exists a relationship between the emergence of political power and the
invention of technological achievements (e.g. the invention of iron smelting at
the dawn of the iron age), that also coincide with the dissolution of the bonds
of kinship. From the invention of iron smelting until the industrial revolution
there were no pivotal upheavals to society. From then on, the succession of
generations leaves the sphere of purely natural cyclical time to become an
event-oriented succession of those in power. These events became the mechanism
for the passing-down of power. This irreversible historical time is oriented
around the succession of those in power, and its measure of success is
determined by the number of successful successions. The written word (and
therefore all of recorded history) is the weapon of choice of those in power.
With writing, language itself attains a fully autonomous reality, and
abstraction of reality that _becomes reality_ when it mediates conscious thought
amongst its readers. This linguistically-constituted reality, having gained
independence of actual reality is just as independent of reality as the ruling
class is independent to the agrarian and laboring classes. With the writing of
historical time appears a new consciousness that has become autonomous, one
independent of the consciousness conveyed and transmitted amongst living people:
the _impersonal thoughts and memories_ of the administrative apparatus of
society: "Writings are the thoughts of the state; and archives are its memories"
(Novalis[
  Novalis: The nom de plume for the German poet and philosopher (1772-1801), Georg
  Philipp Friedrich Freiherr von Hardenberg. The quotation is from his
  collection of aphorisms, _Bluthenstaub_ ("Pollen").
]{#fn131.1 .sidenote}).

### 132

The historical chronicle is the expression of the irreversible time of separate
power[
  "irreversible time of separate power": Debord uses the phrase <q lang="fr">du
  temps irréversible du pouvoir</q> or "irreversible time of power", here he
  distinguishes the power controlled by the ruling class over the direction,
  management, recording of historical time, a power inaccessible to the laboring
  and agrarian classes. This power is most visible in this historical
  chronicle—a story narrating the events deemed most significant to the ruling
  class, and often the only recorded history we have until the arrival of the
  printing press.
]{#fn131.1 .sidenote}.
The rulers of society use this instrument to maintain the voluntaristic
forward progression of their historical time by recording its past—out of which
it has developed from their predecessor. The chronicles are oriented to the
succession of power of each of its rulers, and recording their interests. With
the eventual collapse of each ruling power, this historical orientation also
collapses as these rulers and their interests become obsolete, as such, the
future is opened, the historical past becomes irrelevant (or completely
rewritten by the new ruling power), and the present returns to the indifferent
oblivion of cyclical time—that intuitive time experienced by the rural masses
who, in spite of the comings and goings of rulers and empires, never change. The
_ruling powers own history_, giving it an orientation—a direction, and imbue it
with _meaning and significance_. The historical chronicle of rulers develops and
collapses fully autonomously as a separate sphere of abstracted reality from
common reality. This explains why, from the Western perspective, the history of
Oriental empires tend to be reduced to a succession of religions: all that
remains of these chronicles are the autonomous histories of the administrative
apparatus that served these illusory empires. China and Egypt both held a
monopoly on the immortality of the soul, and the earliest of their famous
dynasties are built upon imaginary reconstructions of the past. The rulers of
these empires, the owners of the private property of history—protected by a
mythical past, make use of illusions to prove the legitimacy of their claim to
rule. But this illusory possession, up to that very moment, was the only
possession then possible, of both the common history and the historical
chronicle they themselves created. The expansion of their own historical power
goes together with the popularization of mythical and illusory ownership. To the
extent they took historical ownership of time and to the degree with which they
underwrote cyclical time with their own mythical chronicles and illusions: such
as the seasonal rites of Chinese emperors to guarantee the successful changing
of the seasons, that they themselves were emancipated from cyclical time.

### 133

The deified ruling class offers to its subjects a dry, unexplained chronicle of
events, which is tied to its mythic history, legitimizing their claim to power.
Their intention is to be understood as the earthly execution of the mythic
commandments. These chronicles were destined to be transcended and become
conscious history[
  "conscious history": A direct translation from <q lang="fr">histoire
  consciente</q> but here Debords meaning seems limited to the written,
  recorded, and internalized personal histories of living members of society.
]{#fn133.1 .sidenote},
but in order for this to occur, a lived-participation of
these officially recorded events had to be experienced by a majority of those in
society. The resulting participation in these events is a _recognition amongst
themselves_ as the possessors of a unique present, a period defined by the
richness of the events of their own actions, and a home built by their own lived
experience. From this participation emerges a general language of _historical
communication_. For members of this society, irreversible time truly exists, and
within it they discover the memorability of their own history as well as the
emergence of a newfound fear of _being forgotten_ into the _oblivion_ of natural
cyclical time. "This is the display of the inquiry of Herodotus of
Halicarnassus, so that things done by man not be forgotten in time, and that
great and marvelous deeds, some displayed by the Hellenes, some by the
barbarians, not lose their glory…"[
  "This is the display of the inquiry of Herodotus of Halicarnassus…": See
  Herodotus & Godley, A., 1920.
]{#fn133.2 .sidenote}

### 134

To examine history is also, inextricably, to _examine the nature of power_.
Ancient Greece was the period when power and the changes resulting from the
succession of power was first debated and understood. This occurred under a
_democracy of the masters of society_, it was a system diametrically opposed to
that of the despotic state—where power settles its accounts only within itself,
hidden inside an impenetrable obscurity of internal affairs, by the only means
of _palace revolutions_ and intrigue. The eventual outcome, either successful,
or ending in failure, is outside the realm of discussion and is taken ipso
facto. The power shared amongst the Greek community was limited to _spending_ a
social life, one which existed entirely upon the separate _production_ of the
slave class—who were not allowed to live autonomous lives, and were kept totally
separate. It was only those who do not work, that live[
  "only those who do not work, that live": It was only members of the privileged
  ruling class who participated in events that were recorded into the historical
  chronicle who 'lived'. Everyone else was forgotten as mere spectators.
]{#fn134.1 .sidenote}.
The principle of separation amongst the Greek city-states[
  "The principal of separation amongst the Greek city-states…": See Thucydides.
  & Smith, C. 1980.
]{#fn134.2 .sidenote}
defined them internally, but was then
focused and expressed externally where it was used to justify the exploitation
of foreign cities. Greece had dreamed of a cross-community universal history,
but was not able to unify itself in the face of an external enemy. It was not
even capable of standardizing a calendar across its constituent cities. In
Greece, historical time became apparent and manifest, but was not yet
autonomous[
  "became apparent and manifest… autonomous": Debord uses the word 
  <q lang="fr">conscient</q> or "conscious" and opposes it to being
  "self-conscious" (which I have rendered as "autonomous"), in that a society
  can be conscious of its own self-development,
  and its progression through time, but this society was not yet capable of a
  self-conscious development for its own needs. Thus, he is saying that Greek
  society was not yet developed to the point where the social bureaucracy
  reaches such an extent that it autonomously directs society for its own ends;
  completely separate from the needs of its constituents.
]{#fn134.3 .sidenote}.

### 135

With the disappearance of the favorable local conditions of the Greek
city-states came the collapse of these states, and the regression of western
thought, there was no resurgence of the ancient mythical organizations. The
subsequent clashes between mediterranean people, and the emergence and collapse
of the Roman empire gave rise to _semi-historical religions_ that were to become
the fundamental building block of a new consciousness of time, as well as new
armor for the emerging separate power.

### 136

Monotheistic religions developed a compromise between myth and history, between
then hegemonic cyclical time, as it dominated the sphere of agricultural
production, and the emerging irreversible historical time—which was the theater
of conflict between rulers and realignments between peoples. The religions that
developed out of Judaism were the fundamental building blocks universally
acknowledged as useful for building new societies based on irreversible
historical time. These tools have democratized the ability to create societies,
but remain constrained by their own illusions. Time within these societies
remains totally oriented to a single final event at the horizon of time—the
so-called "Kingdom of God" which is always and perpetually at-hand. These
religions grew out of the soil of their own historical time, and have rooted
themselves firmly in that place; however, they radically oppose this historical
terrafirma as they proclaim their various semi-historical starting points in
historical time (e.g. the birth of Christ, the flight of Muhammad[
  "flight of Muhammad": The Hegira <q lang="ar">هِجْرَة‎</q> meaning
  "departure" is the migration or journey of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and
  his followers from Mecca to Yathrib, later renamed by him to Medina, in the
  year 622.
]{#fn136.1 .sidenote}).
The chronicle that rolls forwards from these beginnings introduce an
accumulation mechanism towards the final event—the Islamic conquest of the
world, or the increase of capital under the Christianity of the reformation.
This accumulation is a religious inversion of thought, one equal but opposite
to the _countdown_ as time runs out to the Last Judgement; the moment before the
advent of the other, true world. Eternity emerged from cyclical time, it was the
time beyond cyclical time. Eternity is the force which constrains cyclical time
to its irreversible flow, such that it collapses into a _fixed point at times
horizon_, where cyclical time has abolished itself. Bossuet said: "and by means
of the time that passes, we enter into eternity, which does not pass.[
  "and by means of the time that passes…" The French bishop and theologian
  Jacques-Bénigne Lignel Bossuet, for full quote see Bossuet, J. 1872, and
  Perraud, A. 1891.
]{#fn136.2 .sidenote}"

### 137

The Middle Ages is an unfinished mythical world until the Last Judgement, whose
perfection lays just beyond the horizon—in heaven. It was during this period
when cyclical time still dominated production, the first period in which
historical time began to erode its foundations. It was during this period where
one's life was measured according to irreversible time, in the form of
successive stages of life, with the consideration of life as a _voyage_, as
passage without return, in a world whose meaning lies elsewhere. Thus it was
during this period when the _pilgrim_ was seen as the one who transcended
cyclical time, and manifested the symbol of the voyage of life into lived
experience. Individuals found the fulfillment of their personal histories within
the sphere of power[
  "Individuals found the fulfillment of their personal histories within the
  sphere of power": Just as the ruling classes defined themselves by waging war
  over disputed power, individuals attached their personal historical chronicles
  to these rulers—thus the knight and his story is entwined with the story of
  kings.
]{#fn137.1 .sidenote}:
in the participation in the struggles led by power and in
the struggles over disputed power; but the ruler's irreversible time was shared
amongst his people to an infinite degree, all unified to the orientation of the
Cristian era (the realization of the Last Judgement)—a world of _armed faith_,
where the adventures of the rulers revolve around fealty and disputes over who
owes fealty to whom. Feudal society was born out of the merging of "the martial
organization of the army during the actual conquest" and "the productive forces
of the conquered country"[
  "the martial organization of the army during the actual conquest… / …the
  productive forces of the conquered country": See Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1998.
]{#fn137.2 .sidenote}—and the factors responsible for utilizing and applying
these productive forces is the use and effectiveness of religious language.
Under this regime, social domination was divided up into church and state
powers, the latter further divided into complex relations of suzerainty and
vassalage of territorial tenures or urban communes. Respectively, either those
on rural landed estates or as city artisans and merchants. With the collapse of
the official orientation of the Medieval world (the Christian Crusades), gradual
diversification of personal histories emerged, simultaneously revealing the
major unseen contribution of the entire period: the emergence of a cohesive
society, propelled by an underlying irreversible historical time, that
once-and-for-all obliterated the mythical origins of the past and resulted in a
bourgeois class who produces commodities, funds the expansion of cities, and
exploits the natural resources of the planet for commercial gain.

### 138

With the waning of the Middle Ages[
  With "the waning of the Middle Ages": The title of the 1919 book by Johan
  Huizinga. See Huizinga, J., 1999.
]{#fn138.1 .sidenote},
the encroaching hegemony of irreversible
time was experienced as a generalized obsession with an aspect of the old
order—death. Death of oneself, death of the mythical period. This obsession was
brought about by the melancholy of the passing of the mythic world—the last
world where the security of the familiar myth could still counterbalance the
onslaught of historical time as written by the ruling class. This was a
melancholy felt for the inevitability of all earthly things to decay. The great
peasant revolts at the end of the Middle Age were a _response to the hegemony of
historical time_, a time that was violently wresting the peasantry from their
patriarchal sleep formerly imposed by the feudal authorities. These were revolts
spurred on by a millenarian utopian vision[
  "millenarian utopian vision": Millenarianism from Latin millenarius
  "containing a thousand", is the recurring belief by many religious, social, or
  political groups or movements in a coming fundamental transformation of
  society, after which "all things will be changed". Millenarianism has existed
  in various cultures and religions worldwide, with various interpretations of
  what constitutes a transformation. These movements believe in radical changes
  to society after a major cataclysm or transformative event.
]{#fn138.2 .sidenote}
of _creating heaven on earth_, by
those who believed the status quo was full of corrupt politicians and only a
destructive purge could achieve their vision, thus reviving an ethos that
originated from the Christian communities that grew out of the adherents of
Judaism—who believed in the Last Judgement and the eventual arrival of the
Kingdom of God on earth. These ancient beliefs were the response to the troubles
and unhappiness of their times, where announcing the arrival of a new,
legitimate king was subversive to the ruling classes of ancient society. Once
Christianity developed to the point at which it shared imperial power within the
Roman Empire, it officially denounced the hope of achieving Heaven on Earth as
mere superstition. This denouncement came from the Augustinian proclamation[
  Augustinian proclamation: This denouncement came from the theologian and
  philosopher Saint Augustine of Hippo, who rationalized the sack of Rome by the
  Visigoths. According to his philosophy, Heaven on Earth is quite literally the
  Church _itself_, and is the only way to achieve eternity with God in Heaven; a
  unitary physical space shared with the Catholic Church in Rome. Thus the
  Church _has become_ the kingdom of heaven for itself. This work establishes
  the idea of the Catholic Church (the City of God) using any means at its
  disposal, to oppose those governments, political, or ideological movements
  aligned with the Devil (the City of the World). See Augustine. & Dods,
  M., 1993.
]{#fn138.3 .sidenote},
which became the ideological basis of the modern church—that Heaven on Earth had
already arrived in-fact. It was nothing less than the Catholic Church in Rome.
The peasant social revolts of the millenarians naturally defined themselves as
an attempt to destroy that corrupt church. The theoretical problem with the
millenarian revolt, however, was that it was revolting purely on the terrain of
the historical, and didn't address or attempt to undermine the church's mythical
basis. In effect, they were trying to rewrite their own history, but one built
upon a mythical past they didn't control, thus corrupting the project at its
very foundations. In his book _The Pursuit of the Millennium_[
  _The Pursuit of the Millennium_, see Cohn, N., 1970.
]{#fn138.4 .sidenote},
Norman Cohn attempted to demonstrate that the revolutionary movements of the
19^th^ and 20^th^ centuries were not merely irrational sequels to the religious
movements of the crusades, and the religious revolts of the 11^th^, 12^th^, and
13^th^ centuries. On the contrary, these revolutionary movements continue to use
the false myths of religion as their very conceptual basis, while they struggle
to subvert present history to control it for their own aims. What they lack
however, is a consciousness that their struggle is _limited to that which is
historical_ and allows the mythical to remain as unconscious ideology. They
fight the battle to control history but aren't aware of the war to control
mythic ideology. The millenarians had to lose because they could not recognize
the revolution as their own operation. Their failure was due to actions
contingent upon the external sign of "God's Will" to enable their operation,
similar to today's revolutionary movements which condition their actions upon
the decisions of outside leadership. The peasant class was unable to see or
understand the workings of society, and their reliance on external validation
and leadership prevented any sort of unity in action, nor consciousness of
thought. Instead they waged their struggles in the vain attempt to achieve the
same tired vision of an earthly paradise.

### 139

With the end of the Middle Age springs forth the Renaissance. This period took
possession of the historical chronicle from the ancient world, refuting the
religious authority of the Middle Ages and instead establishing both its
heritage and legitimacy from the antiquity of the Greeks and Romans. It is a
celebratory break from the concept of the eternal Kingdom of Heaven. With it
comes an irreversible time defined by an infinite accumulation of knowledge; its
historical consciousness is generated-by and written according-to the actions
and experiences of its democratic governments and people. With it arrives both
the ability to critique and analyze the power of authority vested in the state,
and, as shown by Machiavelli[
  Machiavelli: Nicolo Machiavelli (1469-1527), author of _The Prince_ and _The
  Discourses_, which are early critiques of the power of the state. See
  Machiavelli, N., Bull, G. & Grafton, A., 2003.
]{#fn139.1 .sidenote},
an ability to say the formerly unspeakable—state
legitimacy is desanctified, not bestowed by God, but by man. In the Italian
cities of the Renaissance, the arts and festivals were for the enjoyment of the
passage of time, but this enjoyment of transience was transient itself; which
Burckhardt considered to be "the very zeitgeist of the era": as evidenced by his
reference to a song by Lorenzo de' Medici, "How beautiful the spring of life—and
how quickly it vanishes.[
  "How beautiful the spring of life…": Burckhardt refers to the fleeting nature
  of the Renaissance period itself along with the enjoyment of transient as
  emblematic of that period. The quotation is from a song by Lorenzo de' Medici
  (1449-1492), an Italian statesman, enthusiastic patron of Renaissance culture,
  and de facto ruler of the Florentine Republic. See Burckhardt, J., 1914,
  (Part V, Ch. 8). The song in Italian is:\
  _<q lang="it" class="poem">Quanto è bella giovinezza\
  Che si fugge tuttavia!\
  Chi vuol esser lieto sia;\
  doman non c'è certezza.</q>_<br />
  Roughly:\
  _"How beautiful the spring of life\
  and how quickly it vanishes\
  Let whoever wants to be happy, be;\
  There is no certainty of tomorrow."_ 
]{#fn139.2 .sidenote}"

### 140

The age of kings and monarchs was defined by their tireless struggle to
monopolize and determine historical time. It was a transitional period along the
way to a complete and total domination of historical time by the bourgeois
class, the first class to control irreversible time. The irreversible time of
the bourgeoisie is tightly coupled with labor time[
  "labor time": see Glossary, "time of production".
]{#fn140.1 .sidenote},
they are now liberated from
the natural flows and cycles of the seasons as determined by the cyclical time
of the peasant classes. As the bourgeoisie gained control over historical time,
their labor gradually became _a project to transform historical conditions_. The
bourgeoisie was the first ruling class for which labor became a valuable
commodity. With the abolition of all social privileges, nobility, and titles,
they recognize value only from the exploitation of labor, and have identified
the control of the commoditized body of labor as their primary form of capital.
Finally, the bourgeoisie recognized the growth of labor-capital as the measure
of their own progress. The class that accumulates commodities and capital
continually modifies nature by modifying labor itself, by unleashing and
controlling its productivity. Up to this time, all official social life had been
focused upon the poverty of court life—in the trivial ornamentation and
superficial etiquette of banal state administration, whose prestige culminated
in the "profession of king"—to whom all individual personal histories had to be
sacrificed[
  "and to whom all individual personal histories had to be sacrificed": The
  original French is <q lang="fr">et toute liberté historique particulière a dû
  consentir à sa perte</q> or directly "any particular sense of historical
  freedom had to consent to its loss". This can be interpreted as literal
  sacrifices to the king in the form of one's body: as a soldier in his wars, as
  sacrifice of crops and wealth in the form of taxes. Can also be interpreted
  figuratively, as the sacrifice of one's personal lived experience, since the
  historical chronicle is only ever written by kings, and laypeople are only
  passive spectators destined to be forgotten.
]{#fn140.2 .sidenote}.
The era of control over irreversible time by feudal lords ended with
the French wars of the Fronde[
  "French wars of the Fronde": a complex series of social conflicts, revolts and
  civil wars in France between 1648 and 1653. Debord has variously expressed
  great interest in the Fronde, and even proposed to make a film about it: _Les
  aspects ludiques manifestes et latents dans la Fronde_ ("Visible and Hidden
  Playful Aspects in the Fronde"). See Debord, G., 2003.
]{#fn140.3 .sidenote}
in the 17^th^ century, and with the failure in Scotland to put Charles Edward on
the throne[
  "the failure in Scotland to put Charles Edward on the throne": The failed
  Jacobite uprising between 1745 and 1746 in support of Charles Edward Stuart
  ("Bonnie Prince Charlie"). Also known as the Forty-five Rebellion, Charles
  Edward Stuart led the Jacobite army into England, culminating in the Battle of
  Culloden in April of 1746, resulting in the end of Jacobitism as a significant
  political force.
]{#fn140.4 .sidenote}.
The world was about to change its foundations[
  "The world is about to change its foundations.": A verse copied from "The
  Internationale" (French: <q lang="fr">L'Internationale</q>) a left-wing
  anthem. It has been a standard of the socialist movement since the late
  19^th^ century, when the Second International adopted it as its official
  anthem. The original stanza in French is:\
  _<q lang="fr" class="poem">Foule esclave, debout! debout!\
  Le monde va changer de base\
  Nous ne sommes rien, soyons tout!</q>_<br />
  in English:\
  _"Enslaved masses, stand up!, stand up!\
  The world is about to change its foundations\
  We are nothing, let us be all."_
]{#fn140.5 .sidenote}.

### 141

The victory of the bourgeoisie was a victory of a _profoundly historical time_,
a time dominated by an economic form of production which permanently transforms
society from the top to the bottom. As long as agriculture remained the primary
form of labor, cyclical time continued to constrain social life with
_tradition_, which inhibited the development of historical time. The
irreversible time of the bourgeois economy is brought to bear upon the remaining
vestiges of cyclical time, eradicating it at every encounter across the globe.
Historical time, up until the period of the bourgeois revolution, limited
participation to individual members of the ruling class. It was initially
documented as a mere chronology of cohesive events, generally told as a
narrative. Now however; it is understood in its _generalized form_—no longer a
series of actions and events of individual rulers, but the inevitable unfolding
of events for itself, crushing any individual in its path. The progression of
historical time is now a chronology of events of the commodity, time is no
longer controlled by the ruling class but by the market imperatives of the
commodity. That historical time discovered its foundations in what was
previously unconscious—its substantiation in the political economy—but it must
remain hidden from the light of day. This directionless trajectory of time, a
new fate led by no one[
  "a new fate led by no one": The original French: <q lang="fr">une nouvelle
  fatalité que personne ne domine</q> "a new fate that no one dominates", is
  strongly influenced or copied from Lukács, G., 1971 (Pp. 129): "Hitherto it
  had been that of the blind power of a-fundamentally-irrational fate, the point
  where the possibility of human knowledge ceased and where absolute
  transcendence and the realm of faith began". Essentially, that historical time
  is no longer the events and chronicles of the ruling class, but an irrational
  series of events generated by society in an aimless trajectory into an
  unknowable future.
]{#fn141.1 .sidenote}
and yet fully influenced by the events of the commodity, is the only thing the
market economy has democratized.

### 142

While history is always present as it supports the material and ideological
basis of society, it tends to be invisible at the surface of daily life. The
victory of irreversible historical time was the beginning of _the time of
things_[
  "the time of things": Debord uses the phrase <q lang="fr">en temps des
  choses</q>, rendered directly into English as "the time of things",
  specifically the _objects of mass production_ themselves have become the
  subjects of society, and thus these objects are privileged over social
  relations and individuals. This is a direct reference to Marx's concept of
  commodity fetishism, see glossary.
]{#fn142.1 .sidenote},
brought about due to the successful deployment of its weapons of mass
production, according to the law of the market imperative. The period of the
object has democratized _historical time itself_ from a scarce luxury accessible
only to rulers into a commonly consumed commodity—but as simplified, reduced,
and abstracted changing of objects that subjugate all qualitative use of life.
This newly democratized historical time is the participation in the chronology
of a parade of ever-changing commodity objects, primarily in the individual's
ability to consume these objects. So while cyclical agrarian time had supported
an increased participation in the events that defined the period of an
individuals lived experience, contemporary irreversible historical time tends to
reduce one's participation in the events that define our lived time[
  "participation in the events that define our lived time": rewording of
  Debord's concept of "lived time", originally written as <q lang="fr">temps
  vécu</q>, a concise wording of the concept where an individual can directly
  experience, participate, and contribute to the historical events that define
  their era.  Lived time is opposed to commodity fetishism, see Glossary for
  "lived time" and "commodity fetishism".
]{#fn142.2 .sidenote}.

### 143

The bourgeoisie presented their own irreversible historical time, only to impose
it on society while denying _it's use_. Presented as "once there was history,
but not any more"[
  "once there was history, but not any more" This quotation is from _The Poverty
  of Philosophy_, see Marx, K., 1995. Similar concepts of a history of the
  perpetual present can also be seen in _The End of History and The Last Man_,
  see Fukuyama, F. 2006.
]{#fn143.1 .sidenote}—time has stopped once they gained control, as the owners of
the economy, one tied to _economic history_, they are threatened by any other
use of irreversible time which breaks from the historical chronological
trajectory they control. The ruling class is made up of _specialists in the
ownership of things_, who for that reason are themselves owned by things, their
fate bound to the conservation of this reified history, and in doing so assure
the permanence of an _unchanging present_. Meanwhile, the workers at the
foundation of society are, for the first time, not materially _alienated from
participation in history_, since irreversible time has been democratized[
  "irreversible time has been democratized": The individual now has the ability
  to view, buy, and consume commodity objects in the general economy, whereas it
  was previously limited to a social elite. More concretely, social media allows
  individuals to participate in history by 'going viral', but history quickly
  moves past these individual moments, as the attention—or gaze of the
  public—becomes commoditized and buried under the continual Spectacle, and the
  individual subjects of the 'viral event' are quickly subsumed by the global
  flows of an emergent Spectacular attention economy that expands autonomously
  according to market imperatives. For more on this see Odell, J., 2019 and
  Zuboff, S., 2019.
]{#fn143.2 .sidenote}, and
historical events can be generated from those at the foundations of society. The
demand to _live_ within the historical time which it creates at its foundation,
the proletariat discovers the simple, unforgettable core of the entire
revolutionary project; although all attempts up to now have been defeated, every
attempt signals possible lines of flight for a new historical life.

### 144

The first bourgeoisie to have seized power christened their period of
irreversible time after themselves, and assigned it the value of its absolute
origin: Year Ⅰ of the Roman Republic[
  "Year Ⅰ of the Roman Republic": Much like the Roman Republic, the French
  Revolution revised the calendar to start its chronology from the beginning of
  the Republic, September 22, 1792. With the rise of Napoleon, it was then
  reverted to the traditional Roman-Christian calendar in 1806.
]{#fn144.1 .sidenote}.
The Republic blossomed out of the revolutionary ideology of general freedom
which had to first destroy the last remnants of its mythical social values and
any traditional regulation of society. But the ideology of general freedom had
been unable to conceal its underlying will, although draped in Roman
clothes[
  "draped in Roman clothes": Paraphrased from Marx, full quotation "Thus Luther
  donned the mask of the Apostle Paul, the Revolution of 1789 to 1814 draped
  itself alternately as the Roman republic and the Roman empire…", see Marx,
  K., 2008.
]{#fn144.2 .sidenote}—the _freedom of commerce_.
Having destroyed the social foundations of traditional society in order to
establish its unchallenged rule, this emerging society of the commodity found
itself unstable, and had to rebuild the social passivity that came before it,
thus "Christianity with its religious cult of man in the abstract was the most
fitting form of religion"[
  "Christianity ... most fitting form of religion": Full quotation from Marx, K.
  Marx, K., Mandel, E., Fowkes, B. & Fernbach, D., 1978 (Ch. 1, Section 4).
]{#fn144.3 .sidenote} for the reinstatement of passivity. Thus the
bourgeoisie made a compromise with Christianity, one symptom of which is
reflected in its presentation of time: the Republic abandoned its own
calendar[
  "the Republic abandoned its own calendar": The Romans used the Coptic calendar
  (also known as the Alexandrian calendar) which was used by the agrarian
  populace in Egypt, it was a reform of the ancient Egyptian calendar introduced
  by Ptolemy III. This calendar was abandoned by the Romans after the reforms of
  dictator Julius Caesar and Emperor Augustus in the late 1^st^ century BC,
  where it was called the Roman or Julian calendar. In October of 1582, Pope
  Gregory XIII introduced the Gregorian calendar, which is now the most widely
  used calendar in the world, officially coupling the Roman chronology with the
  Christian chronology.
]{#fn144.3 .sidenote}
and its own conception of irreversible historical time—instead bound to, and
extending the chronology of the _Christian era_.

### 145

The development of capitalism entailed the _global unification_ of irreversible
time. Universal history became a reality, as the whole globe was unified under
the development of irreversible time. This is a singular history that progresses
the same everywhere at once, amounting to the end of history—a refusal of the
progression of any major historical divergence. This appears the world over as a
repetition of _the same day_, a uniform and equal amount of time fully allocated
to the production of commodities. This is a unified irreversible historical time
belonging to the _globalized marketplace_, and thus also the time of the global
spectacle.

### 146

The irreversible time of commodity production is primarily the measure of
commodities produced[
  "the measure of commodities produced": E.g. GDP: Gross Domestic Product.
]{#fn146.1 .sidenote}.
Therefore _the conception of time generalized_ across the
globe refers only to the time spent laboring to produce commodities, and should
only be organized by the specialist interest groups who own the production of
those commodities. This conception of time is not general in character, but
_merely one particular type of time_[
  "merely one particular type of time": Irreversible time attempts to generalize
  only the time spent laboring, which serves only the interest of capital, but
  this is a time that is devoid of any social value. Laborers only experience
  exploitation with the increase in capital, and the increase in measures like
  GDP are completely divorced from lived experience.
]{#fn146.2 .sidenote}.

:::::
