## VI. Spectacular Time {title="Spectacular Time"}

> _"We have nothing that is ours but time, which even those without a roof can
> enjoy."_
>
> —Baltasar Gracian, _The Art of Worldly Wisdom_

### 147

The time of production—commodified time, that time which has been segmented,
allocated, where every interval is equivalent in value and therefore
indistinguishable. The time of production produces an infinite accumulation of
these fungible intervals of time that are equivalent without equality. This
effectively renders irreversible time into abstract units, of which each segment
must prove on the stopwatch their quantitative equality. These abstracted units
of time are, in reality, merely their use-value in _exchangeability_. According
to this regime of social-control by commoditized time—"time is everything, man
is nothing; at best he is the carcass of time." This is a complete devaluation
of time—an inversion of the idea that time is the space in which human society
grows and blossoms into the "terrain of human development."

> "time is everything, man is nothing…": See Marx, K., 1995 (Ch. 1, Sec­tion 2).

> "terrain of human develop­ment": See Marx, K. 2005 (Ch. 13).

### 148

To complement the time of production—the time of human non-development, is
_consumable time_. Consumable time is returned to social life as a by-product of
the time of production. It is experienced as _pseudo-cyclical time_.

### 149

Pseudo-cyclical time is in fact the time of production _disguised_ as time to be
consumed freely by the workers. Pseudo-cyclical time exhibits the same
characteristics as the time of production, namely equally segmented, fungible
units of time; the qualitative dimensions of which are suppressed in favor of
quantitative equality. Since this pseudo-cyclical time is a complementary
by-product of the time of production, _it must maintain the hegemony and
legitimacy of the time of production_ as the colonizer of time itself, in which
consumable time is relegated to the subservient role as gift rather than as
equal. To maintain these complementary roles, pseudo-cyclical time necessarily
finds itself laden with false attributions of value, and these moments are
segmented into a sequence of artificially distinct events, which are merely
undifferentiated moments of time perceived to be more highly valuable.

> "it must maintain the hegemony and legitimacy of the time of production": This
> is a significant rewording from the original French, which reads
> <q lang="fr">Mais étant le sous-produit de ce temps destiné à l'arriération de
> la vie quotidienne concrète</q>. This was translated by Knabb as "But as a
> byproduct of commodified time whose function is to promote and maintain the
> backwardness of everyday life". My translation abandons the "backwardness of
> everyday life" wording used in translations by both Knabb and Nicholson-Smith.
> I've attempted to clarify how the time of production is privileged over the
> subservient role of pseudo-cyclical time. See Debords' _Perspectives for
> Conscious Changes in Everyday Life_ for more on the "colonization" of everyday
> life, see Knabb, K., 2006 (Pp. 90-99).

> "false attributions of value": E.g. That the weekend is more valuable than the
> weekdays, the general sentiment that Mondays are worse than Fridays. These
> moments of time are perceived to be more valuable since the worker is able to
> consume this time freely.

### 150

Pseudo-cyclical time is the contemporary equivalent to the time spent surviving
in nature—foraging for food, searching for shelter, but in the contemporary
milieu—shopping, chores, and conducting economic transactions. Under both of
these regimes, daily life is devoid of decisions, while under pseudo-cyclical
time the individual is no longer bound to the natural order, but instead bound
to the economic consumerist-nature thus created by alienated labor. Thus,
pseudo-cyclical time returns to the same _natural_ cyclical rhythms that
regulated the survival of pre-industrial societies. It builds upon the vestiges
of ancient cyclical time, using it as a foundation and generating new
variations: day and night, weekly work and weekend rest, and the cycle of
harvest festivals, holidays, and vacations.

### 151

Pseudo-cyclical time is a time that has been _transformed by industry_. This
time is itself a consumable commodity, one which has combined all aspects of a
social life which were previously distinguished: private life, economic life,
and political life. This combined consumable time of contemporary society is the
raw material to be consumed by the worker how they see fit, but only as input to
a set of ever-expanding products on the market of socially controlled schedules.
"A product that already exists in a form suitable for consumption may
nevertheless serve as raw material for some other product."

> "a time that has been transformed by industry": The way individuals spend
> consumable time is determined by industries whose sole output is the creation
> of ever-new consumable entertainments and activities: packaged vacations,
> films, video games, television series, social media, etc.

> "A product that already exists… other product": C.f. Marx, K., Mandel, E.,
> Fowkes, B. & Fernbach, D., 1978. (Vol. I, Ch. 7, Section 1). As the worker
> earns more vacation time the longer they stay at a company, this additional
> time must be then used to consume new films, new television series, and new
> hobbies that mandate the consumption of new equipment. Thus this "free time"
> becomes pseudo-cyclical time—a consumable commodity that is the raw material
> for the generation of new products and commodities.

### 152

In the most developed sectors of concentrated capitalism, the market creates
"all inclusive" packaged experiences, which constitutes a single unified
commodity, thus increasing the number of diverse commodities. This is made
possible by the increase and ubiquity of the services and hospitality economy,
the increase of leisure activities, and the "all-inclusive" luxury accomodations
with pre-set vacation itineraries. This spectacular form of leisure even extends
to socialization as well, with the inclusion of "exciting conversations" and
"celebrity meet & greet" events. These types of events would not be taken
seriously without a corresponding impoverishment of the realities they parody.
Obviously, these commodities reflect the advancement in sales techniques in that
they can be bought with credit.

### 153

Consumable pseudo-cyclical time is spectacular time. In the most narrow sense,
it is the time allocated to the consumption of images, more broadly it is the
conception of time itself as a consumable commodity (a representation of moments
of time perceived as having more intrinsic value than the time of production,
the so-called "real life" the worker must endure.) This consumable time is
increasingly allocated to the consumption of images (images which in turn serve
as advertisements for all other commodities), deepening our immersion in the
spectacle. This time is the realm of the commodity, and the images are the
medium with which these commodities act upon our consciousness most efficiently.
This realm is the chosen battlefield from which the spectacular commodity mounts
its strongest attack. The ultimate goal of this attack is to maintain our
attention upon the spectacle itself, and to increase the time allocated to the
consumption of pseudo-cyclical time within the spectacle. This battlefield is at
once the locus of the spectacle, the center of its operation, and the most
exemplary form of all consumption. The fetishization of time-saving products and
services so sought after by contemporary society, whether in the increasing
speeds of cars, the speed and convenience of online shopping, pre-made or
instant meal replacements, and the explosion of "fast-casual" restaurants all
contribute to the increased time spent consuming images. In the United States,
Americans end up watching television three to six hours per day. The social
aspect of consumable time is dominated by moments of leisure and
vacations—moments which are presented as fleeting, _exclusive and distant_,
therefore desirable by definition, like any spectacular commodity. These moments
are simultaneously presented as separate from daily life and yet more exemplary
as moments of real authentic experience. These authentic moments are supposed to
be looked-forward to, whose cyclical return is to be expected. But it is within
these authentic, privileged moments that are supposedly more real than daily
life, what is in fact being produced is a more intensified version of the
spectacle: a personalized, lived, spectacular event. Thus, what has been
portrayed as an authentic life turns out to be merely a life more _authentically
spectacular_.

> "time allocated to the consumption of images…": Debord limits the conception
> of consumable time to the consumption of images, but his meaning of "images"
> can be interpreted loosely to include the consumption of films, newspapers and
> magazines, advertisements in all their forms, video games, social media, and
> any representative form of consumable media products and services.

> "pre-made or instant meal replacements": Debord uses the example of "ou de
> l'usage des potages en sachets" or "the use of instant soup". Most recently
> there's been an explosion in home meal delivery kits such as HelloFresh, Blue
> Apron, and Sun Basket. As for instant meal replacements, look no further than
> Soylent, the minimalist liquid meal which I myself must admit to drinking. I
> described my rationale for drinking it in _Hacking Life_: "[Soylent] allows
> Ron to simplify: to save on time (shopping, cooking, and cleaning), money (it
> is an inexpensive source of nutrients), and waste (it can keep for weeks)."
> see Reagle, J., 2019 (Pp. 102). I'm actually drinkng Chocolate Soylent while
> editing this note because it doesn't make a mess. Would Debord be ashamed, or
> would he understand that we're all continually subject to the Spectacle?

### 154

The contemporary period of spectacular time presents itself as essentially a
time made up of many frequently recurring festivals, it is actually a period
without festivities. During the period of cyclical time, the festival was a
frequent and luxurious experience of communal participation in life, now
impossible in a society without communities or luxury. These pseudo-parties,
poor parodies of gift exchange and Jubilee typical of festivals of the previous
period have been vulgarized into a surplus of expenditure, but this expenditure
only results in an expanding amount of disappointment; a disappointment centered
upon the promise of the next pseudo-festival, one just as equally sure to
disappoint. Under the reign of the spectacle, the lower the use-value (e.g.
moments of leisure or pure inactive boredom) placed on time, the more highly
cherished this time becomes as it is experienced as a more authentic time of
real life. The reality of time has been replaced by the _advertisement_ of
spectacular time.

> Jubilee: A periodic festival of general debt-forgiveness, and often included
> the freeing of both slaves and prisoners. See Graeber, D. 2011.

### 155

In ancient agricultural societies, the passing of cyclical time was perceived as
the passage of their labors in sync with the natural transition of the seasons.
In contrast, the consumption of pseudo-cyclical time during the contemporary
period of spectacular time is in contradiction with the time of production—which
is motionless; its history has reached a stable, unchanging conclusion while
pseudo-cyclical time has cycles, and continues to allow change and lets the
participants write their _own_ history in a linear progression of time. The
cyclical time of the agrarian period was motionless with its repetitive illusion
of cyclicality, but the events of these cycles were authentically experienced.
Spectacular time is the progression of linear time as changed by the influence
of spectacular history, but this history is an illusory experience, one merely
witnessed through the media.

> "Spectacular time is the progression of linear time…": The original French is
> a beautifully worded example of Debords' use of détournement, so I've included
> it here: <q lang="fr">Alors que le temps cyclique était le temps de l'illusion
> immobile, vécu réellement, le temps spectaculaire est le temps de la réalité
> qui se transforme, vécu illusoirement.</q>, translated as "Whereas cyclical
> time was the time of unchanging illusion, actually lived; spectacular time is
> the time of changing reality, lived illusorily."

### 156

The process of commodity production continually innovates new, cheaper, and more
efficient methods to produce the same products. As such, consumption is
relegated to the mere repetition of the same products with decreasing costs, and
decreasing quality. Under the reign of spectacular time, dead labor dominates
living labor, and the past accumulations of capital continue to dominate the
present creation of time and history.

> dead labor vs living labor: Dead labor is without actual creation: a passive
> form of rent seeking, control of capital flows and the management of living
> labor; the labor of the ruling class. Living labor is the labor to reproduce
> the material basis of everyday life, labor of the working class, and creators;
> those actually producing services, products, and affects. For more on
> affective labor, see Hardt, M. & Negri, A., 2000.

> "the past accumulations of capital continue to dominate the present": Full
> quote is "In bourgeois society, the past dominates the present; in communist
> society, the present dominates the past." See Marx, K., Engels, F. & Jones,
> G., 2002 (Part 2).

### 157

Historical time lacks the histories of individual human lives. The individual
human life is still not historical since its events are not recorded and
simplified into a linear narrative. Furthermore, the pseudo-events popularized
and dramatized by the spectacle are not actually experienced by the individuals
who watch them. In any case, these pseudo-events are immediately made irrelevant
by the novelty-generation mechanism inherent to the spectacle. On the other
hand, what life events have actually been experienced have no relation to the
official irreversible historical time which dominates society. The actual lived
experiences of life remain outside the allocation of pseudo-cyclical time (the
time legitimated by the time of production.) So while work remains something
perceived as 'apart from life', and 'free time' remains perceived as more
authentically real life, the real lived experience of commuting, doing chores,
child care, cooking, sleeping, etc, is therefore cut off, as separate from 'real
life', remaining undocumented and unaccounted from any personal or historical
time. This deprives daily life of language and as a formal concept, and it lacks
any analysis of what events occurred within its own past, events which have not
been communicated. The real time of life is misunderstood, forgotten,
undertheorized, and smothered—to the benefit of the fake memories of the
spectacle: a memory of the unmemorable.

### 158

The spectacle then, as the reigning system of social organization, is a method
for the paralysis of history and memory. The spectacular society has abandoned a
history based upon historical events. This is a society with a _false
consciousness of time_.

### 159

A prerequisite for the conscription of the working class as "free" producers and
consumers of commodity time was the _violent expropriation of that time_.
Spectacular time was only possible after this first dispossession of the
producer.

> "free producers": Free as in liberated to produce and consume as they see fit.
> Under Spectacular time, the worker is no longer free when they perceive time
> within the narrow understanding of time alternating between the time of
> production and consumable time. This is a false dichotomy of course. Their
> pseudo-free choice is in fact contingent on their time having been stolen in
> the first place.

### 160

The irreducibly biological element of labor is its natural human cycles: the
workers dependence on sleep and waking, health and injury—both attest to the
accumulation of irreversible time as the inevitable truth of aging. Contemporary
production systems consider these natural and inevitable factors as _secondary_
concerns. As such, aging and health are ignored by the economy of capitalist
production as externalities that have no bearing on the production of consumable
widgets, new inventions, and entertainment. The individual spectator trapped at
the center of spectacular society can not experience a conscious sense of life
as a journey moving towards fulfillment, or the inevitable march to death.
Instead, life remains in stasis, on-hold for the next spectacular event. As
such, we who have given up the idea of living will surely never be able to
embrace our own death. Life insurance advertisements stake their business
strategy on a moral falsehood that claims that it is reprehensible to die
without first ensuring the continuation of one's economic productivity. In "The
American Way of Death", death itself is advertised as an inversion, an event
that attempts to maintain the _appearance_ of life by means of excessive
sentimentality, ostentatious displays of wealth, and an overly commercialized
industry to support it. Alongside the continual bombardment of advertising, it
is forbidden to get old, everyone's "youth-capital" must be economized, while
all models, celebrities and actors remain forever young. Thus, despite our
collective efforts to economize youth, it has none of the lasting and cumulative
properties of financial capital. The social absence of death is equal to the
social absence of life.

> _The American Way of Death_ is an allusion to the book about the American
> funeral industry. See Mitford, J. 1978.

### 161

As described by Hegel, time is the _necessary_ alienation, as we age we
gradually lose our sense of self and discover our true selves. Time is the
environment in which we become the other, the thing outside ourselves we didn't
understand, and in becoming other, we become a more fully understood self. The
opposite is true of the alienation generated by the spectacle of late
capitalism—this is an alienation felt as disenfranchisement from meaningfully
participating in the historical events during one's lifetime. We may spectate
but we cannot participate, absolute alienation in the _foreign present_. This is
_spatial alienation_, the society that separates the subject from participating
in the events of our own time, foreclosing our individual ability to experience
self-discovery through aging. The beauties and graces of the naturally
alienating process of time has instead been petrified, and the risks of _lived_
self-creation and discovery have been eliminated.

### 162

In contrast to the _passing fashions_ that preoccupy pseudo-cyclical time, the
_dominant styles_ that actually influence the contemporary period are carefully
obfuscated and hidden—these can be recognized as the main concerns that will
cause revolution if they become apparent and revealed.

> "passing fashions": Those trivialities that get the most spectacular attention
> in the media, but are so often immediately irrelevant despite the hype.
> Examples include "issues"-oriented political debate, political scandals and
> palace intrigues, clothing, diet and food fads, internet memes, television &
> film, and video game entertainment.

### 163

The motion of time exists despite human beings, it is only concretely
experienced as moments when society consciously segments and describes time for
_human use_. The perception of time for any society is determined by its stage
of human labor: under agrarian labor and cyclical time, time is humanized and
therefore any individual is able to participate in the historical events of
their own time; under economic productive labor and irreversible historical
time, the time is dehumanized—the individual cannot meaningfully participate in
the lived historical events of their own period. The revolutionary project of
realizing a classless society goes along with an inclusive historical life, one
in which all people can participate in the events of their own historical
period. This project entails the withering away of a singular measure of
historical time in favor of a more humane, individualized, and _federated
multiplicity of independent times_, ones which are playful in nature, where
every individual time can interplay and unify on an ad-hoc basis, where all
timelines are autonomous, valid, and simultaneously present. A successful
realization of this revolutionary project is a generalized, fully conscious
conception of time, determined by personal life events which are recorded into a
new historical record, a personal chronology that can be flexibly federated into
other personal chronicles voluntarily and playfully—a sort of communism that
suppresses all spectacular media-driven and universalized histories. This would
be a communism that suppresses and "abolishes everything that exists
independently of individuals", in essence, a project to abolish the historical
time of kings, the chronicle, the government with their official time and
finally to abolish spectacular time.

> "federated multiplicity of independent times": This project entails the
> withering away of a unified measure of time, an allu­sion to the anarchist
> concept of replacing the nation state with federations of independent
> communi­ties. This is also a postmodernist perspective on time, in that the
> abolition of a singular chronicle entails an abolition of grand-metanarratives
> as well as a unified perspective on "truth"—in favor of a multiplicity of
> timelines and perspectives which are all equally valid.

> "abolishes everything that exists independently of individuals": C.f. Marx, K.
> & Engels, F. 1998 (Part 1, Ch. 4, Section 6). In essence, the autonomous
> spectacle and all forms of autonomous history and power will gradually
> disappear.

### 164

The world has already dreamt of such a time—it has to just wake and remember to
really live it.

> "The world already dreams of such a time": See Marx, K., September 1843.
