::::: {.chapter}

## <span class="ch-roman">VII.</span> The Organization of Territory {title="The Organization of Territory"}

> _"Whoever becomes master of a city accustomed to live in freedom and does no
> destroy it, may reckon on being destroyed by it. For if it should rebel, it
> can always screen itself under the name of liberty and its ancient laws, which
> no length of time, nor any benefit conferred will ever cause it to forget; and
> do what you will, and take what care you may, unless the inhabitants be
> scattered and dispersed, this name, and the old order of things, will never
> cease to be remembered…"_
>
> —[Machiavelli]{.ix data-ix="Machiavelli, Nicolo"},
> _[The Prince]{.ix}_

### 165

[Capitalist production]{.ix data-ix="production, capitalist"} has become
ubiquitous, all military, political, and trade barriers between societies have
been broken down, there is no longer an outside to Capitalism. This is an
extensive and intensive process of _[trivialization]{.ix}_ of unique local
customs, traditions, methods, languages, and cultures. These local distinctions
are commoditized and _[banalized]{.ix data-ix="banality"}_ for
[consumption]{.ix} by the [global market]{.ix}. This created a universal space
of the global market, where local goods, cultures and the places themselves are
made accessible to the market, each comparable and homogeneous to better conform
to the ease of [exchange—therefore]{.ix data-ix="value, exchange"} bankrupt of
its once unique character. The corporate restrictions on [craft]{.ix} guilds of
the [Middle Ages]{.ix data-ix="middle ages"} assuring the _quality_ of [craft
production]{.ix data-ix="production, craft"} had to be destroyed to make way for
the era of [mass production]{.ix data-ix="production, mass"}, just as it had to
dissolve the autonomy and quality of _places_.[
  "it had to dissolve the autonomy and quality of places": This can be seen
  happening everywhere simultaneously, with the reproduction of the same banal
  streets, stores, languages, restaurants, styles, and customs across the
  globe—the "airbnb-ification" of the world. See Chayka, K., 2016.
]{#fn165.1 .fn}
The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it
batters down all Chinese walls.[
  "The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it
  batters down all Chinese walls": From the original French: <q lang="fr">Cette
  puissance d'homogénéisation est la grosse artillerie qui a fait tomber toutes
  les murailles de Chine.</q> This is a direct reference to _The Communist
  Manifesto_, see Marx, K., Engels, F. & Jones, G. 2002 (Part 1)
]{#fn165.2 .fn}

### 166

It is in order to become ever more identical to itself, to get as close as
possible to unchanging monotony, that the _free space of the commodity_ is
henceforth at all times modified and reconstructed.

### 167

The [spectacular society]{.ix data-ix="society, spectacular"} gradually
eliminates geographic distance, it simultaneously replaces it with new internal
distances in the form of [spectacular separation]{.ix data-ix="separation,
spectacular"}.[
  "spectacular separation": Society is making travel more efficient while making
  places more homogeneous, simultaneously making places irrelevant with
  technologies such as remote work, video conferencing, and virtual reality—the
  artificial images used as substitutes for reality itself. These geographic
  distances are then recreated in the form of spectacular separation—the direct
  experiences such as community, people, places, events and lives people were
  previously living are increasingly substituted with ephemeral recreations and
  cheap copies as our new lived reality, alienating us from directly lived
  experiences and creating divisions within communities and even families.
]{#fn167.1 .fn}

### 168

As a by-product of the circulation of consumer goods, tourism, the circulation
of people as [consumption]{.ix}, is fundamentally reduced to the [leisure]{.ix}
of going to see what has become [banal]{.ix data-ix="banality"}. The application
of business-style management techniques to [travel]{.ix} guarantees the
_[equivalence]{.ix data-ix="equivalence without equality"}_ of places. The same
modernization that has removed time from travel has also removed the reality of
place.

### 169

Society has developed its own techniques for the task of molding the natural
landscape it finds itself within. Urbanism[
  Urbanism: The French word <q lang="fr">urbanisme</q> means "city planning"
  which has an impersonal and bureaucratic connotation. Broadly encompassing
  urban planning, real-estate development, and gentrification.
]{#fn169.1 .fn .ix data-ix="urbanism"}
is capitalism's direct mode of [appropriation]{.ix} of natural and human
environments. This capital appropriation gradually evolves towards absolute
domination of the environment—in the form of the densely packed urban
[city]{.ix data-ix="cities"}. Urbanism continues to expand, eventually remaking
the totality of the landscape into its _own elaborately decorated stage_.

### 170

The drive to [urbanization]{.ix} is an imperative of [capitalism]{.ix}, this
drive results in "a freezing of life".[
  "A freezing of life": A static world devoid of spontaneity, the result of land
  development and bureaucratic zoning laws optimized for rent seeking and
  increased land valuations, devoid of nature—where its residents have no
  ability to change their surroundings to suit daily life. All desire for change
  is eliminated in order to serve the profit generating imperative of capital,
  all autonomy of local residential use is therefore foreclosed, instead
  privileging real estate development as the only legitimate use. The result of
  this is a predominance of land organized around the valuable placement of real
  estate objects over the living use and alteration of land by the very people
  who live in these spaces, people who wish to change their surroundings over
  time as use-patterns and ways of living change with the seasons and with time.
  For more on this see 0xADADA, 2019 (April 16).
]{#fn170.1 .fn .ix data-ix="frozen life"}
Described by Hegel as a predominance of "the peaceful
coexistence of space"[
  "The peaceful coexistence of space": This quote has been changed from the
  original: "The Object thus posited as outside the subject and in its own self
  as an externality is partly the quiescent side-by-sideness of space, partly a
  restless becoming in the successive moments of time. Space and time are
  abstract intuitions or Universal Forms of Intuition." Quote taken from Hegel,
  G.W.F., 1986 (Pp. 151 No. 136).
]{#fn170.2 .fn .ix data-ix="Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich"}
over "a restless becoming in successive moments of time."

### 171

The technical apparatus of the forces of capitalism ([television]{.ix}, social
media, government policy, and consumer products) should be understood as the
tools of [separation]{.ix}: grouping people into exclusionary tribes as well as
[alienating]{.ix data-ix="alienation"} people from their labor and
environment—exclusion from [participation]{.ix} in daily life. The technical
apparatus of urbanization is the fundamental method that makes all others
possible—and far more efficient. Urbanization is the creation and preparation
of the territory upon which all other technical methods are then deployed. It is
the very _[technology of separation]{.ix data-ix="separation, technology"}_.

### 172

[Urbanism]{.ix data-ix="urbanism"} is the modern method that satisfies the need
to safeguard class [power]{.ix}. This method preserves the [atomization]{.ix}
of each worker that the urban conditions of production had dangerously _brought
together_. The continual struggle of capital against the organization of the
labor force to improve their working conditions has found urbanism to be its
most effective field of operation. Ever since the street-by-street battles
fought in [Paris]{.ix} by the Communards of the [French Revolution]{.ix}, those
in power have improved their methods of maintaining order on the streets,
eventually resulting in the suppression of the streets themselves.[
  "…eventually resulting in the suppression of the streets themselves": Between
  1853 and 1870 the French Emperor Napoleon III commissioned Georges-Eugène
  Haussmann to destroy the neighborhoods that were the very heart of the French
  Revolution: namely from the Quartier des Arcis to the Hôtel de Ville,
  including Île de la Cité, transforming these areas into broad avenues wide
  enough for an army to march down.
]{#fn172.1 .fn .ix data-ix="Haussmann, Georges-Eugène"}
In his book _[The City in History]{.ix}_, [Lewis Mumford]{.ix data-ix="Mumford,
Lewis"} describes a "one-way system" whereby "the present means of long-distance
mass [communication]{.ix}, sprawling isolation has proved an even more effective
method of keeping a population under control" (Mumford, L., 1961). This system
empowers the [ruling class]{.ix} to broadcast their historical perspectives and
[ideologies]{.ix data-ix="ideology"} to an alienated society who no longer has
an ability to respond with its own voice or even amongst each other. Urbanism is
the general trend, a global movement to isolation within the crowd, a sense of
"_being alone, together_," but in service to the needs of corporate
production—we are isolated to the greatest extent allowable to maximize
production and consumption. The greatest examples of how urbanism isolates us
together is in the factories, cultural centers (museums, theaters, etc),
[vacation]{.ix} resorts, and housing developments[
  "vacation resorts, and housing developments": The planned, gated residential
  community "Celebration" in Osceola County, Florida which was developed by The
  Walt Disney Company is an example of a pseudo-community where both vacation
  and housing developments converge. The community is primarily separated from
  society by gates, and each household is carefully separated from the others by
  heavily manicured landscaping—a type of hostile architecture leaving all
  shared community space to become de facto dead zones of inactivity.
]{#fn172.2 .fn}—all
explicitly oriented to the goal of creating [pseudo-community]{.ix}. The
dominant imperative of [atomizing]{.ix data-ix="atomization"} isolation follows
the individual into the family unit, where each member is in their own room,
each isolated by their own personalized [television]{.ix}, music, and internet
entertainment that are so particular to the individual that sharing common
entertainment interests becomes increasingly more difficult—and therefore more
[isolating]{.ix data-ix="isolation"}. The more isolated the individual becomes,
the more dominant the images of spectacular society become[
  "The more isolated the individual becomes, the more dominant the images of
  spectacular society become": This is to say, the individual is most vulnerable
  to the dominating one-way conversation of the mass media when they are alone,
  and unable to relate what they see in the media to their isolated experience
  of daily life. The increase of media outlets and the explosion of personalized
  streaming sites like Netflix, Disney+, HBO Max, Hulu, etc, make our television
  habits increasingly unrelatable (meanwhile experimental television formats
  like "Bandersnatch" point to the horizon of personalized media in which the
  actual content of any single episode is personalized for each individual.) For
  more on how Netflix is transforming personalized media, see 0xADADA, 2021
  (January 14)
]{#fn172.3 .fn .ix data-ix="images;society, spectacular"}
and this is where the spectacle acquires its full potential.

### 173

Prior to the 20^th^ century, innovations in [architecture]{.ix} were exclusively
designed to serve the interests of the [ruling class]{.ix}. Now, for the first
time, architectural innovations are aimed directly _at the poor_. Architects no
longer build ornate, unique places but merely reproduce aesthetically bankrupt
habitats characterized by their _mass_: mass-produced for 'the masses', dictated
by the contemporary conditions of production.

![
  Al Ain City, a new housing development in\
  Mbazzarah Al Khadra, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, UAE\
  Photo by Andrzej Bochenski. Lodz, Poland.
](images/al-ain.jpg)

At the core of these conditions are an
_[authoritarian]{.ix data-ix="authoritarianism"} decision making process_
by which a corporation, driven by the profit imperative, works with the local
municipality to [abstract]{.ix data-ix="abstraction"} a local environment into
an interchangeable space of abstraction. This type of [architecture]{.ix}
develops the same anywhere in the world: the buildings use the same designs and
trendy materials no matter where they are, and the same international businesses
soon arrive to service the communities (e.g. McDonald's, Starbucks, etc.) This
works especially well in undeveloped countries, which are their most fertile
terrain. This process is most efficient when a society's material power is
inversely proportional to its _lack of progress_ to appropriate social control
of this power. The delay of the conscious appropriation of [urbanism]{.ix}
corresponds equally with the power of [thermonuclear weapons]{.ix} and [genetic
bioengineering]{.ix} (where genetically engineered human life is already
possible.)

### 174

We live in the era of the destruction of the organic urban environment by an
urbanism that is exploding the city, littering the countryside with what Lewis
Mumford calls "a formless mass of thinly spread semi-urban tissue".[
  "a formless mass of thinly spread semi-urban tissue": Quote from Mumford, L.,
  1961 (Ch. 16.6, Pp. 508).
]{#fn174.1 .fn .ix data-ix="Mumford, Lewish"}
This explosion is exemplified by strip malls, restaurant franchises, and
landscapes developed to serve the required efficiencies of
[automobile]{.ix}-oriented consumption.[
  "landscapes developed only to serve the required efficiencies of
  automobile-oriented consumption": For an in-depth analysis on the subject of
  suburbanization, see Duany, A., Zyberk, E. & Speck, J., 2010. James Howard
  Kunstler gave an insightful and funny TED talk on the topic called _The
  ghastly tragedy of the suburbs_, see Kunstler, J. H., 2004.
]{#fn174.2 .fn .ix data-ix="consumption;suburbs"}
This is the dictatorship of the automobile, where all designs create landscapes
to serve vehicles, not animals nor human pedestrians. The automobile, arguably
the first example of a product produced during the first stage of commodity
[abundance]{.ix}, has come to reconfigure the human environment of the city with
the dominating imperatives of speed and available parking space to create a
centrifugal trend moving gradually away from the city into any nearby
countryside with "undeveloped" space. The dominating force of the highway
dislocated the historical, organic [city]{.ix data-ix="cities"} centers and
instead promoted an ever-growing flat expanse.[
  "an ever-growing flat expanse": Cities like Los Angeles or Las Vegas are the
  perfect examples of sprawling automobile oriented cities.
]{#fn174.3 .fn}
Meanwhile, the countryside is developed ad-hoc around temporary "distribution
factories"—poor copies of the urban centers of exchange, alienated from the
street and the land around them by acres of ample parking space. Even then,
these temples of [conspicuous consumption]{.ix} themselves become victims of the
centrifugal trend of suburban expansion, becoming congested and then likewise
abandoned or reconfigured. This gradual process of centrifugal reconfiguration
of the urban and suburban environment is the sign that the city is gradually
_consuming itself_.

### 175

[Economic history]{.ix data-ix="history, economic"} has developed upon the
presumption of an opposition between the town and the country, creating a race
to equilibrium such that a distinction between the two have all but disappeared.
The current _paralysis_ of [historical development]{.ix data-ix="development,
historical"}, the so-called "[End of History]{.ix}" where [irreversible
historical time]{.ix data-ix="irreversible time"}
refuses to progress[
  "where irreversible historical time refuses to progress": See commentary on
  [thesis 145](#ref145.1).
]{#fn175.1 .fn .ix data-ix="perpetual present"}—privileging
the development of the independent goals of the [spectacular
economy]{.ix data-ix="economy, spectacular"}, which comes at the expense of all
other pursuits. This has resulted in the disappearance of both town and country
instead of their _transcendence_. This is most clearly visible as bits and
pieces of both urban and rural life are strewn about the landscape, each eroding
the other into smooth and undifferentiated zones that are neither [urban or
rural]{.ix data-ix="suburbs"}, but have come to dominate the developed regions
of the world.

### 176

The emergent [power]{.ix} of the [city]{.ix data-ix="cities"} has made a
universal history possible—those events and recorded stories which is accessible
to all people. [Universal history]{.ix data-ix="history, universal"} emerged at
the moment the city became predominant and ruled over the country.
[Marx]{.ix data-ix="Marx, Karl"} considered one of the greatest
[revolutionary]{.ix data-ix="revolution"} merits of the bourgeoisie was that it
"subjected the country to the towns",[
  "subjected the [rule of the] country to the [rule of the] towns": Quote C.f.
  Marx, K., Engels, F. & Jones, G., 2002 (Part 1).
]{#fn176.1 .fn}
whose "very air is liberating".[
  "very air is liberating": Quote is from the German saying
  <q lang="de">Stadtluft macht frei</q> or "city air liberates" a medieval
  German saying, expressing how serfs could free themselves from their ties to
  the landed gentry by escaping to the towns.
]{#fn176.2 .fn}
While the history of the city is also the site for the historical struggle for
freedom, it has yet to host its victory. It is also a history of the tyranny of
a state administration of both city and country. The city is the _focal point of
history_ because it is a concentrator of social power, which makes the
historical enterprise possible, as well as an awareness of the past, a universal
[historical consciousness]{.ix data-ix="consciousness, historical"}. The present
trend of the city consuming itself is a symptom of the [spectacular
economy]{.ix data-ix="economy, spectacular"} retarding the
[unification]{.ix data-ix="unity"} of a society of people attaining freedom and
a universal historical consciousness—one that will enable society to overcome
the totality of its [alienation]{.ix}.

### 177

"The country demonstrates just the opposite fact: isolation and separation"[
  C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1998. (Ch. 1 Part 4, Section 2), full quote:
  "The country demonstrates just the opposite fact: isolation and separation":
]{#fn177.1 .fn .ix data-ix="isolation;separation"}
(as opposed to the [city]{.ix data-ix="cities"}, which mixes and brings people
together). As [urbanism]{.ix} consumes the city, it replaces it with a
_[pseudo-countryside]{.ix}_ devoid of any attachment to nature or the social
aspects of either [traditional farming]{.ix data-ix="tradition;farming"}
villages or the mixtures of [culture]{.ix} apparent in the organic city have
been lost. This new condition of "urban redevelopment", that densely packed and
yet separate and isolated environments produces a new artificial
[peasantry]{.ix data-ix="peasants"}. These new peasants are molded by their
physical conditions and the influence of the [spectacle]{.ix}: where once
peasants were isolated by physical distance now find
[architectural]{.ix data-ix="architecture"} separation, and where simple
ignorance once reigned, instead reigns the blinding influence of the spectacular
[image]{.ix data-ix="images"} which recreates a simplemindedness in the new
peasantry. These forces, both historical and contemporary prevent the peasantry
from unifying and taking action in their own best interests, to become
[conscious]{.ix data-ix="consciousness"} of their own responsibility as the
creative historical force within society. Peasants in fact create this world,
but the lies and artificiality of the spectacle continue to credit the elite;
thus to seize control of society and the responsibility for its creation seems
just as beyond their reach as it was for those living in an [agrarian
society]{.ix data-ix="society, agrarian"} to seize control of the natural
rhythms and cycles of their labor. The agrarians lived according to a [cyclical
time]{.ix} controlled by nature, but contemporary [pseudo-cyclical time]{.ix} is
controlled by society itself. The traditional agrarian peasantry was the basis
for the "[Asiatic mode of
production]{.ix data-ix="production, asiatic mode of"}" as exemplified by the
Chinese state bureaucracy, a form of "oriental despotism"[
  "oriental despotism": See Wittfogel, K., 1981. More recently, 
  Žižek has identified a shift from authoritarian despotism to an emergent form
  of capitalism he calls "Capitalism with Asian Values". See Žižek , S., 2010.
]{#fn177.2 .fn}
which, because of its wide dispersion across geography, necessitated a heavily
[centralized bureaucracy]{.ix data-ix="centralization;bureaucracy"}. The
neo-peasantry, which has emerged from the material conditions of the
[pseudo-country]{.ix} combined with the mental influence of the spectacle
differs from the traditional peasantry in that their simplemindedness,
ignorance, and _apathy_ to seize power has to be maintained in the present as
well as _historically manufactured_. Simple ignorance has been replaced by the
organized spectacle of falsehoods.[
  "the organized spectacle of falsehoods": A rewording of the original French,
  <q lang="fr">l'ignorance naturelle a fait place au spectacle organisé de
  l'erreur</q> or a "natural ignorance has given way to the organized spectacle
  of error". The original phrasing was very abstract, I've tried to clarify that
  it is specifically about the lies and exclusions of the media. Late capitalism
  has reformed education by exclusion, to such an extent that it increasingly
  moves resources away from history, the arts, health & fitness, and the
  humanities. Instead, it focuses on STEM subjects and a vocational style of
  education most well suited to producing a specialized, short lived—and
  therefore disposable workforce rather than a civic-minded citizenry producing
  a public good.
]{#fn177.3 .fn}
These "new cities" of pseudo-countryside, the urbanized but consumed
[cities]{.ix} where the new pseudo-peasantry reside are the clearest symptoms
of a complete break from the historical time upon which they were founded. These
places continually distance themselves with their own past and create an
unchanging [continuous present]{.ix data-ix="perpetual present"}. Their motto
may well be: "On this site nothing will ever happen, and _nothing ever has_."
This is all the result, obviously, because the liberation of [historical
consciousness]{.ix data-ix="consciousness, historical"} has not yet occurred in
these cities. Instead, we see the uncontrolled proliferation of the force of
_historical absence_, which begins to compose its own exclusionary landscape.

### 178

A [consciousness]{.ix} of history that threatens the spectacle is to discover
the force capable of reappropriating the environment for lived time.[
  "reappropriating the environment for lived time": The force of a consciousness
  of history can reintroduce society and individuals to actual lived reality, a
  reality that enables participation in the events of one's own contemporary
  time and makes the local environment conducive to living fully engaged social
  lives.
]{#fn178.1 .fn .ix data-ix="lived time"}
The proletarian [revolution]{.ix} is the _critique of human geography_,[
  "critique of human geography": See more on human geography: Knabb, K., 2006
  (Pp. 1-14, 62-66, 69-73, 86-89).
]{#fn178.2 .fn .ix data-ix="critique;human geography"}
a critique of the environments, and social relationships that individuals are
forced to navigate. Through revolutionary acts and events, individuals and
communities must construct environments, events, and social relationships to
provide the basis of an autonomous control of not only their own labor, but
their entire history—thus creating a reality of their own. Revolution opens
physical and social space to a new and dynamic mobile space of play, where the
rules of play are informal, dynamic and freely chosen.[
  "space of play, where the rules of play are informal, dynamic and freely
  chosen": Later in life, Debord formally explored the concept of 'play', and
  most concretely, he and his wife, Alice Becker-Ho, developed a table-top game
  called <q lang="fr">Le Jeu de la Guerre</q> or _A Game of War_. Debords'
  exploration of play as it applies to his game as well as its revolutionary use
  against neoliberal capitalism is examined in Barbrook, R. 2014.
]{#fn178.3 .fn}
These open societies liberate authoritarian spaces, and in the process
rediscover the previously independent and unique character of places without
making them exclusive. This is accomplished without the attachment to the land
and agrarian ties to [cyclical time]{.ix}, it is an unattached, free space
determined by its own [egalitarian]{.ix data-ix="egalitarianism"} and parallel
[historical times]{.ix data-ix="historical time"}, where many
[chronologies]{.ix data-ix="chronology"} are all available and equally valid.
This returns society to an authentic way of experiencing [directly lived
reality]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"}, and thus brings back the
authenticity of _[travel]{.ix}_, and of life understood as a journey of ones own
creation with its own meaning.

### 179

The most revolutionary idea about [urban
development]{.ix data-ix="development, urban"} hasn't emerged from
[urbanism]{.ix}, technology, nor from aesthetics. It is the decision to
reconstruct the environment according to the needs of power vested with the
[workers councils]{.ix}. The environment will be configured by the _anti-state
dictatorship_ of the proletariat[
  "anti-state dictatorship of the proletariat": Debord specifically chose the
  phrase <q lang="fr">la dictature anti-étatique du prolétariat</q> to cut
  through the ambiguities of Marx's dictatorship of the proletariat, implemented
  by Stalin as a dictatorship _over_ the proletariat. His wording makes it very
  clear that he envisages a distinctly non-state form of social organization.
]{#fn179.1 .fn .ix data-ix="anti-state dictatorship of the proletariat"}—a
generalized and collective form of self-management of aligned individuals
working together to create a public good, a "generalized self-management"[
  "generalized self-management": A Situationist term for the form of
  self-governance elsewhere called the "anti-state dictatorship of the
  proletariat". See Raoul Vaneigem's _Notice to the Civilized Concerning
  Generalized Self-Management_ in Knabb, K., 2006 (Pp. 363-371).
]{#fn179.2 .fn}
according to the needs of the collective. The power of the workers councils can
only be realized and effective if it has the ambition to transform the totality
of existing conditions. It cannot assign itself trivial
[reformist]{.ix data-ix="reformism"} policy or any lesser task than the total
transformation of existing conditions if it is to be recognized and _to
recognize itself_ in a world of its own making.

:::::

