## VIII. Negation and Consumption in the Cultural Sphere

> _"Do you really believe that these Germans will make a political revolution in
> our lifetime? My friend, that is just wishful thinking… Let us judge Germany
> on the basis of its present history—and surely you are not going to object
> that all its history is falsified, or that all its present public life does
> not reflect the actual state of the people? Read whatever newspapers you
> please and you cannot fail to be convinced that we never stop (and you must
> concede that the censorship prevents no one from stopping) celebrating the
> freedom and national happiness that we enjoy."_
>
> —Ruge, _Letter to Marx, March 1843_
>
> > Arnold Ruge, the German philosopher and political writer glibly dismissed
> > the idea of a revolution in his letter to Marx, it was only five years later
> > when the Germans revolted in 1848, resulting in the Marzrevolution of
> > 1848-1849. This quote appeared in The Situationist International issue #12,
> > with this quote "Five years later that revolution had come. As an amusing
> > example of a type of historical unconsciousness constantly produced by
> > similar causes and always contradicted by similar results". See "The
> > Beginning of an Era" Knabb, K., 2006 (Pp. 288).

### 180

Culture, in a historical society divided into classes, is the sphere of
ephemeral knowledge shared in common amongst living individuals, that is to say,
it is that power of generalization which _exists independently_ and autonomous
to itself, as a division of intellectual labor and intellectual labor of
division. A society in which culture is detached from history, a development
beyond the agrarian society of a unified mythical culture-and-history is,
according to Hegel, "when human life lost its unifying power and when opposites
lost their living connections and interactions and became autonomous." When
culture gains independence from history, it then can embark upon an
imperialistic drive to make itself predominant (over history.) This drive
gradually undermines cultures' own historical basis and eventually negates
itself, destroying this independence. The history that creates the relative
autonomy of culture, and the ideological illusions about this autonomy, is also
expressed as the history of culture. The history of culture can be read as the
gradual negation of culture, a triumphant march towards cultures
self-destruction. Culture is society's intellectual labor to search for the loss
of society's unification of history and culture. In the course of this search,
culture as a sphere separate from history is destined to negate itself.

> "a division of intellectual labor": The development of historical society from
> its roots as a society of myth to the agrarian cyclical society is a shift
> from one based upon an oral history integrated and entwined with lived
> experience (as one in the same), to a historical society which has separated
> written chronology from lived experience, which is represented as culture.

> "when human life lost its unifying power...": Debord reworded a quote by
> Hegel: "When the power of synthesis vanishes from the lives of men and when
> the antitheses have lost their vital relation and their power of interaction
> and gain independence, it is then that philosophy becomes a felt need." See
> Hegel, G. & Guth., 2013. This line by Hegel is also quoted by Georg Lukacs,
> _History & Class Consciousness_, see Lukács, G., 1971. What was lost with the
> ancient Greek oral traditions were the regular occurrence of mortals
> interacting with Gods. With the gradual decline of the Greek mythic society,
> we see a corresponding rise in the Greek philosophical tradition.

### 181

The struggle between tradition and innovation, which is the principle of the
internal development of the culture of historical societies, can only be
sustained through the permanent victory of innovation. And yet, cultural
development is carried forth by the total movement of history. When history
discovers the self-encompassing totality of its own role in culture, it tends to
both ignore the importance and impact of the role of culture to society, and
assert itself as the totalizing force towards a suppression of all alternatives.

> "a suppression of all alternatives": The original French is "la suppression de
> toute séparation" but I've translated to clarify its meaning as a suppression
> of all alternatives to the total dominance of the time of production. This has
> the effect of solidifying cultural aspects of society as implicit
> truth—ideology. This freezes the historical society into a specific
> ideological period. This is the mechanism Debord was alluding to in chapter
> VI. "Spectacular TIme" where he says "the time of production—which is
> motionless; its history has reached a stable, unchanging conclusion" (see
> thesis 155). In this case the ideology of the contemporary period is the "time
> of production": an unchanging fact, society can change in superficial (e.g.
> cultural) ways, but the time of production is a fixed and permanent condition.

### 182

The explosion of society's general body of knowledge, which contains the
understanding of history as the heart of culture, becoming an irreversible
self-knowledge, which is expressed by the destruction of God. As Marx said in
his _Introduction to a critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right_: "The critique
of religion is the essential precondition for all criticism". The critique that
begins with the negation of religion and therefore God is also the critique that
continues forever. Without the constraints of religion, there is no longer a
coherent set of rules to live by, and the lived reality of culture forces this
culture to its own dissolution. Every discipline, consider philosophy, once it
gains autonomy from the shackles of history—is bound to collapse, any single
(non-integrated) discipline becomes autonomous and attempts to account for all
of society with its own methodologies even within its narrow field of study. The
_lack of total rationality_ in favor of narrow specific focus dooms these
separate disciplines to obsolescence—or to have limited use because the wider
integrated social sphere will always demand a cohesive understanding of both
culture and history; which the specialized field alone cannot deliver.

> "the destruction of God": The society's mythic past is viewed as a mere
> fictional narrative, and with it is the fiction of a God that previously
> formed its foundations.

> "The critique of religion is the essential precondition for all criticism":
> See Marx, K. 1844.

> "the critique that continues forever": The society founded upon a critique
> without end becomes the basis of its self-perpetuating ideology.

### 183

Culture, the knowledge of lived experience shared amongst contemporary society,
grew out from the historical chronology that was the dissolution of the mythic
society. Culture however, has not become a fully separate discipline—it exists
as a subset of, and tied to the sphere of history, with unique aspects limited
to the domain of techniques of living daily life and efficient modes of
communication. Culture makes up only partial understanding of daily life within
a society that is only _partially historical_. In this sense, culture only
explains a small subset of historicized society. It remains the meaning in an
insufficiently meaningful world.

> "Culture makes up only part of the complete understanding of daily life…":
> Especially considering how alienation prevents everyone from equal access to
> participation in the daily events which define their period.

> "It remains the meaning in an insufficiently meaningful world.": Rewording of
> Marx: "Religion is the sigh of the oppressed, the heart of a heartless world,
> the spirit of spiritless conditions." See Marx, K., 1844.

### 184

The end of the history of culture manifests when it is most ossified and unable
to develop in time. This occurs in two opposing forms: the development of
culture as a specific domain of study that attempts to transcend history, and
the maintenance of this culture, ossifying it and re-presenting it for
spectacular contemplation. In this process, culture cycles through time but
remains ultimately frozen. The first form has linked its fate to social
criticism, and the second form defends the power of the ruling class.

> "the maintenance of this ossified culture": The second form of the end of the
> history of culture is visible with Hollywood's continual remaking and
> rebooting of existing film franchises, the cycling of clothing fashions, and
> the reemergence of old traditions as new trends (e.g. stoicism, the paleo
> diet, etc.) These repeating patterns are taken up for reexamination by
> spectacular society and generate new spectacular images to promote the old as
> new again. In this process, culture itself cycles but remains ultimately
> stagnant and continues to distract the proletariat from real social critique.

### 185

Each of the opposing forms of the end of culture exists under a unitary field,
within the domains of knowledge and the domains of sensory representation (which
was generally considered _art_ in historical societies.) The first form holds an
opposition between the domain of knowledge and the theory of praxis. The domain
of knowledge produces an ever growing accumulation of fragmented
specializations. Each specialization eventually negates itself when the
_endorsement_ of the existing conditions of capitalism forces it to _renounce
the knowledge_ that built its foundations. This is opposed to the theory of
praxis, which alone contains the integrated truth by the secret of its use. The
second form, the domain of sensory representations, privileges an opposition
between the critical self-destruction of _common language_—the actual ways of
living and experiencing daily life as outmoded, versus the artificial necessity
of "new" or "improved" ways of experiencing non-life within the commodity
spectacle.

> "integrated truth by the secret of its use": Lived practice has the advantage
> of access to the specialized set of domain-specific knowledge, integrated
> knowledge, _and_ access to the practical techniques of their use.

> "non-life within the commodity spectacle": In privileging these "improved"
> illusions of the experience of daily life, the spectacle manages to recreate
> an artificial recomposition of daily life, assembled from a hodgepodge of
> traditions and past trends, but with a facade of novelty. This task is
> primarily accomplished within the realm of the media through the
> representation of this false novelty with its regeneration of the same images.
> This is a continually lower-fidelity copy of what was formerly considered
> life, thus an illusory representation of non-life.

### 186

The mythic culture of agrarian societies provided the reference points for a
common language which bound these communities together with grounded truths.
Once society loses these myths, they lose the reference points upon which their
shared language is based, thus communication gradually breaks down, bringing
community along with it. This process continues until a subsequent historical
society is able to replace these once common _mythical_ referents with
_historical_ referents. With this replacement completed, a shared language based
on historical referents can emerge with its newly formed historical society. Art
in the mythical society is the representation of myth itself, in a unified sense
that is equally part of daily life and history—living myth. Art in the
historical society is an aspect of culture, the _representation_ of daily life,
but separate from history. Art, in the contemporary sense, is thus independent
of history, is focused on the creation of works which represent the culture of
daily life within a historical society. Initially emerging from its use in the
religious sphere, this limited discipline similarly follows the same course of
eventual self-negation as other specialized domains (as described in thesis
185). Thus, art's declaration of independence as a total perspective for social
introspection smuggles in its own inadequacy for the realization of an
integrated analysis of both historical and cultural society using tools that are
merely cultural. This is to say, art attempts to describe the totality of
reality with a specialized set of tools dooms itself to its own self-negation.

> "a common language which bound these communities together with grounded
> truths": In order for any language to be able to communicate shared concepts,
> the symbols used to represent these concepts must reference other shared
> concepts; if the referents are lost, the communication breaks down, and the
> language is no longer shared in common, as that which were formerly shared
> references now point to different semantic concepts.

> "Art in the historical society is an aspect of culture, the _representation_
> of daily life, but separate from history": As art is not part of the
> officially recorded events of history as inscribed by those in the
> administration of power.

### 187

The _positive_ significance of postmodernism, that decomposition movement which
is the formal annihilation of all art as a separate sphere of discourse, is the
loss of a common language of general communication. The _negative_ significance
of this loss is that a multitude of common languages remains to be found.
Historical societies at least had the unifying and generalizing properties of a
common language understood to all, and the art of that period can be
characterized by an accessibility with respect to their common language. That
said, this common language was limited to the _belated_ announcement _to others_
about what had been experienced without any real dialog. Contemporary society,
on the other hand, is without a common language, each discipline speaking only
to itself, unable to speak to wider society and admitting this lack of dialog as
acceptable and inevitable. The problem we must undertake is to repurpose
language through the participatory activity of practice, creating a community
using common language to articulate all disciplines involved in the experience
of daily life. The playful ways contemporary poets and artists have
reappropriated language to derive new meaning within their artistic works can be
broadened to exist simultaneously inside their works and outside—to include all
of contemporary society, and thus possess the community of universal discourse
and play with time that up till now was merely _represented_ by poetic and
artistic works.

> "the loss of a common language": Each discipline of study is busy redefining
> terminology such that individuals outside these specialized spheres of
> linguistic practice are unable to understand the ongoing discourse, and a
> highly specific language is privileged to the point where communication both
> within and without the field is incomprehensible. The privileging of the
> destruction of common language is an indication of decay, eventually resulting
> in the self-negation of the independent discipline.

### 188

When art achieves independence, it represents reality with a flourish of color,
describing it more beautifully than reality itself. It is at that moment when
reality seems old and grey, a poor substitute for the hyperreality of the art
itself. Reality can no longer be perceived in its full beauty or rich color, its
original beauty is available only in memory or nostalgia. The greatness of art
appears at the dusk of life.

> "a poor substitute for the hyperreality of the art itself": For more on
> hyperreality, see thesis 192, see also Baudrillard, J., 1994.

> "The greatness of art appears at the dusk of life": The French here is: "La
> grandeur de l'art ne commence à paraître qu'à la retombée de la vie." is
> seemingly inspired by Hegel: "When philosophy paints its grey in grey, a shape
> of life has grown, and it cannot be rejuvenated, but only reorganized, but the
> grey in grey of philosophy; the owl of Minerva begins its flight only with the
> onset of dusk." See Hegel, G., Wood, A. & Nisbet, H., 1991 (Pp. 22).

### 189

The _baroque_ period of the arts was the first period in which the historical
time created by the ruling classes was able to express itself as a predominant
influence in the discipline of the arts. With the beginning of the
Enlightenment, the christian world and its explanation of reality was challenged
by science, rationality, lutheranism, and the protestants. The christian world
had suddenly lost its unified center, the last remaining vestiges of the
mythical society which had emerged from the Roman Empire finally lost its
singular grasp on society, which it had held during the middle ages. This was
the collapse of the power of a mythical order founded in Heaven and Earth. The
art of the baroque period is _the art of change_, it embodied the change of its
times, it captured the ephemeral power and moralities it recognized as they
shifted from a mythic modality to a historic modality. As Eugeio D'Ors put it,
art during the baroque period chose "life instead of eternity". The outstanding
achievements of art during the baroque period were in theater and the festival,
as well as the theatrical festival, a temporary (and ephemeral) constructed
space in which all artistic symbolism and reference were self-contained and
self-referential, thus creating a common language accessible to all within this
space. The theatrical festival creates a unified space operating as _passage_ to
a cohesive experience away from the disorder occurring in greater society at
that time. Contemporary discourse on the topic of aesthetics often places
excessive importance on the concept of the baroque, and yet this is a symptom of
a growing awareness that a rejuvenation of the classical period of antiquity is
impossible in a contemporary social context. Instead, the last three centuries
witnessed attempts to establish brief, artificial, and limited artistic projects
imitating the superficial aspects of classicism: worship of virtue, a return to
family values, etc. These attempts always promote the authority of the moment,
either the nobility, the political class, or even a revolutionary vanguard;
these moments are merely a promotion of the status quo, dressed in Roman togas.
Once the baroque moment had run its course, subsequent artistic movements
advanced as a procession of ever more individualistic arts of negation, which,
from Romanticism to Cubism, each renewing their assault on the common language
of previous movements and symbols, as well as history itself, until the complete
destruction of the sphere of art. This disappearance of an art representing
history is indicative of a ruling elite who no longer communicates using
history; history had become independent of the ruling class. At the end of the
baroque period, the social basis of the elite aristocracy was limited to a
playful expenditure of their own wealth; meanwhile, capitalism had appeared to
usurp their power with a new form of class power (the bourgeoisie) bereft of the
hereditary and ideological basis with which the elite aristocracy was laden.
This new power whose foundations were the simple management of the economy,
ushering in a period with no human _mastery_, but a new elite in the form of
pure capital. The baroque orchestra, an example of long-lost comprehensive
artistic unity, which has long been missing from contemporary artistic
_creativity_, has in some sense, been revived in the contemporary _consumption_
of the totality of past art. As all of the artistic works of the past become
accessible for consumption, only recontextualized, stripped of the original
context in which it was created, reinterpreted for consumption in a contemporary
historical context. This transforms art specific to a time and place with a
specific reflection of its own historical reality into a generalized,
universalized "global art": one devoid of any representation of time, place, or
context. Much like how art in the baroque period reflected an elite historical
chronology of its period, global art becomes an even more abstracted edifice, a
new baroque for the contemporary period. Into this edifice all art is melded,
both integrating past and contemporary art forms into a single artistic
orchestra, in which the art of all ages and societies can be accepted together,
a unified "recollection of memories", signalling the _end of the world of art_.
This is now the age of museums, when no artistic communication can exist, where
all art is destined to become relevant _only_ to its continually renewed
contemporary context, and its originally intended context, referents, symbolism,
and communication are abolished. Whatever particular communication problems past
works of art may have had are eclipsed by all the present-day obstacles to
communication _in general_.

> The Baroque period: From the early 17^th^ to the middle of the 18^th^ century.

> theatrical festival: The festival was singing, dancing, building, decorating,
> beauty pageantry, athletics in which the participants not only accomplished
> the acts but became spectacles themselves—and to others, their equals and
> fellow citizens, who had done just the same activities. The festival is the
> exact opposite of the culture of celebrity, in which one merely spectates and
> has no ability to participate or even engage with the events of daily life.
> For more on the theatrical festival, see Graeber, D. 2011.

> "life instead of eternity": This is to say, art privileged reality in the here
> and now, embracing the beauty of ephemerality over the promise of an eternal
> place in Heaven. See Ors., Valéry, A. & Dassas, F., 2000. This work has not
> yet been translated into English.

### 190

Art in contemporary society is experiencing its own dissolution, a movement
focused on its own self-negation within a historical society where the common
person does not participate in the events of daily life. Art yet strives to
describe and reflect upon a chronology it is too specialized to adequately
explain. Art ends up representing the attempt to achieve change, but merely
succeeds in showcasing its inability to do as such, thus revealing the
impossibility of change. The more grandiose its ambition, the further its
realization lies beyond. This art is necessarily _avant-garde_, and _it is not_.
Its avant-garde is its own disappearance.

> "Art in contemporary society is experiencing its own dissolution, a movement
> focused on its own self-negation": The Situationists explored the concept of
> art as an exploration of its own negation, see Knabb, K., 2006 (Pp. 183-188,
> 393-397).

### 191

Dadaism and surrealism were two art movements that proclaimed the end of modern
art. Historically and ideologically opposed to one another but only partially
conscious of the other, these two movements were contemporaries of the last
great assault of the proletariat revolutionary movement, the defeat of which
left both movements trapped and immobile inside the victorious social sphere of
modernity—the very same sphere these movements had opposed and had declared as
dead and buried. The defeat of the revolution sealed the fate of these artistic
movements within the sarcophagus of modernity. Dadaism and surrealism and bound
to one another by their most radical contribution to the sphere of art—their
opposition to the ideological critique of the other. This opposition revealed
the insufficiency of their critique, each too one-sided and narrow in scope to
provide an adequate and total critique of society. Dadaism sought to _abolish
art without realizing it_; surrealism sought to _realize art without abolishing_
it. The critical position elaborated since then by the _Situationists_ has shown
that the suppression and realization of art are inseparable aspects of the same
_transcendence of art_.

> "Dadaism and surrealism": Dadaism rejected the rationality and the logic of
> capitalism, instead embracing an anti-bourgeois stance of nonsense. The
> surrealists embraced science to further its goals of free artistic expression,
> not necessarily rejecting the ideals of the past, but free of the constraints
> of reason and embracing the omnipotence of thought.

> "Dadaism sought to abolish art without realizing it; surrealism sought to
> realize art without abolishing it.": C.f. Hegel, G., Wood, A. & Nisbet, H.,
> 1991: ""Philosophy cannot be realized without abolishing the proletariat, and
> the proletariat cannot be abolished without realizing philosophy."

> "The Situationists critical position is…": see more on the Situationists on
> art see Knabb, K., 2006 (Pp. 27-30, 224). This is the only use of the word
> "the Situationists" in this work, as Debord noted in Sanguinetti, G., McHale,
> J. & Debord, G., 2003.

### 192

The spectacular society produces a tendency to consume the art and cultures of
the past, recontextualizing it with contemporary language to be relevant to the
present and yet stripped of its original meaning, its symbolism, and its
referents—leaving only a congealed mass of superficial artistic form, bankrupt
of any communicative or emotional qualities. This consumption is not discerning,
it captures both positive and negative aspects of culture. This consuming power
is the representative voice of the spectacle in its most expressive form: the
_communication of the incommunicable_, or speech without meaning for the sake of
speaking. In this social environment we will see flagrant attack on language and
the use of certain words as having a positive value by the ruling authorities as
its use results in the maintenance of the status quo. The horizon of this state
of affairs is a language that is celebrated for its total absence of
communicative power. The true nature of the attacks on communicative language is
concealed when examining the creative expression of contemporary art and poetry,
since the primary function of the spectacle is to _bury historical memory under
the weight of decontextualized and non-communicative cultural artifacts_, thus
the artistic referents located within art and poetry remain hidden. These
cultural artifacts are continually presented as a parade of new and novel
innovations, but are only recontextualizations of artifacts from the past, yet
stripped of communicative value. This is a society of pseudo-novelty that
continues to use a Modernist ideology and methods that make up its fundamental
core. This is a strategy used in such disciplines as "neoliterature" which
blatantly admits that it merely contemplates the written word for its own sake,
and yet acts as if this were a new approach. So while the contemporary movement
celebrates the death of a universal common language as beautiful in its own
right, it simultaneously executes its most atomizing practice against a
generalized organization of a common society: the application of a "globalized"
homogeneity onto all cultures worldwide. This approach seeks to establish the
same commercial brands and "experiences" worldwide, as a universal hegemonic
order of the corporate global village. This results in a hodgepodge of
decomposed capitalist values, marketing arts, and hegemonic "neo-artistic"
aesthetics—creating a flat and banal experience of recomposed pseudo-life,
applied everywhere simultaneously. This recomposed hodgepodge of "orchestral
works" is most visible in the architecture and urban planning of the spectacle.
The hodgepodge is the product of the spectacle: to recreate the formerly
fragmented worker into a form more ideal to the efficiencies required under
late-capitalism—"a personality well integrated into the group" an increasing
trend described by American sociologists Riesman and Whyte. Ultimately the
project of late-capitalism is the same everywhere: to _reorganize society
without community_.

> "decontextualized and non-communicative cultural artifacts": Baudrillard's
> later concept of hyperreality and "the copy without original" intersect with
> Debords conception of the Spectacle: appropriating history in order to
> generate pseudo-cultural artifacts based upon the original but abstracted from
> it. See Baudrillard, J., 1994. An additional pointer to the concept of
> hyperreality is also in thesis 198 where Debord directly references Boorstin's
> book "The Image", which elaborates on the concept in detail, see Boorstin,
> D., 1992. This concept is also relevant to Deleuze & Guattari with their
> concept of deterritorialization, see Deleuze, G. & Guattari, F., 1987.

> "neoliterature which admits that it merely contemplates the written word for
> its own sake": Another example is how so much postmodern film uses the
> breaking of the fourth wall to involve the viewer as a participant in the
> action, and yet Shakespeare had used this technique long before, and yet it is
> presented as a novel innovation.

> "global village": Another proponent of hyperreality, Marshall McLuhan coined
> the term "global village"; understood as a global coexistence altered by
> transnational commerce, migration, and culture. See McLuhan, M. & Lapham,
> L., 1994. McLuhan was also an influence on Baudrillard's conception
> hyperreality.

> "a flat and banal experience of real life, everywhere simultaneously": It is
> now possible to hang out in the same coffeeshops in any major city worldwide,
> and taste the same flavors, listen to the same music, and see the same art on
> the walls. You are everywhere and yet nowhere. See Chayka, K. 2016.

> "This recomposed hodgepodge of 'orchestral works' is most visible in the
> architecture and urban planning": An example of how the spectacle seeks to
> create "integrated spaces" where artists, software engineers, and workers
> exist side-by-side and yet their specialized languages make universal
> communication understanding impossible. These workers become isolated,
> together; an aggregate of unmixed elements.

> "a personality well integrated into the group": See Riesman, D., Glazer, N.,
> Denney, R. & Gitlin, T., 2001. See Whyte, W., 2002.

### 193

Once culture becomes commodified, it must become the flagship commodity in the
society of the spectacle. Clark Kerr, in _The Uses of the University_ who
studied the trends of the knowledge industry stated that the industry of
production, distribution, and consumption of _knowledge_ was already 29% of
annual gross-domestic product in the United States. He predicted that the second
half of the 20^th^ century would be driven by the knowledge industry, similar to
how automotive drove the first half, and the railroads drove the last half of
the 19^th^ century.

> "The Uses of the University": Debord is quoting Kerr "The production,
> distribution, and consumption of 'knowledge' in all its forms is said to
> account for 29 percent of gross national product according to Fritz Machlup's
> calculations", see Kerr, C., 2001 (Pp 66).

### 194

The advancement of increasingly specialized fields of academic study result in
the destruction of common language and evolve into _spectacular thought_,
thinking that must justify a society without justifications. Spectacular thought
invades knowledge and culture because the spectacle funds only those fields of
discourse that either legitimize the status quo or refuses to investigate the
material basis that constitutes spectacular society. Discourse that doesn't
defend the status quo will not be taken seriously. This leaves only a general
science of false consciousness, a pseudo-science that can never, and will never
seriously investigate the material basis of the spectacular system.

> "Discourse that doesn't defend the status quo will not be taken seriously":
> Debord doesn't say this in thesis 194, but says as much elsewhere in the text;
> it seems relevant here. I have taken liberties in hopes that it clarifies his
> position.

### 195

Spectacular thought, the officially funded lies that legitimate spectacular
society, act to obscure the actual organization of society around the lies and
images they promote: _subcommuncation_—a language without meaning. The discourse
within spectacular thought does not know that "conflict is at the origin of
everything in its world". The specialists operate within the sphere of
spectacular thought, using the specialized non-language of the spectacle to
yield the absolute power of one-way communication that corrupts absolutely.
These individuals are corrupted by their contempt, contempt for their use of
non-language, contempt of gaining success by using contempt, and the contempt
they feel is validated by how _truly contemptible_ the spectator of spectacular
society really is.

> "conflict is at the origin of everything in its world": C.f. Heraclitus:
> "Conflict is the origin of all things." Debord uses Heraclitus but
> simultaneously points towards Hegel, in which the world is fundamentally made
> and continually remade by the balancing of oppositional forces through
> conflict and resolution, thesis & antithesis in order to reach its state of
> balance—synthesis; the dialectic. In thesis 196 Debord directly attacks the
> non-dialectical criticism of spectacular thought and his position is that
> Spectacular thought is not aware that it is locked in a dialectical struggle.

> "an absolute power… that corrupts absolutely": C.f. Lord Acton's famous
> remark, "Power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely."

### 196

In the specialized thinking of the spectacular system, a new division of labor
and specialized discourse arise, as the very perfection of this system poses new
problems. One example of this trend is the opposition between _the spectacular
critique of the spectacle_ undertaken by sociology on one hand and the
_apologetics of the spectacle_ taken up by the various disciplines of the
structuralist school on the other. Sociology uses over-specialized language and
methods to present false despair, a non-dialectical critique that is devoid of
meaning beyond publicity. The structuralist school promotes a false optimism of
the benefits of the spectacle, a practice of non-thought that becomes the
_official omission_ of all historical practice. Between these two forms of
enslaved thought, however, exists no valid critique of spectacle, only thought
submissive to the ideology of the spectacle.

> the structuralist school: An area of sociological discourse, primarily a
> methodology that implies human society must be understood by way of their
> relationships to broader, overarching systems and structures and these
> structures underlie all things humans do, think, perceive, and feel. It is
> most prominently linked to the thinkers Claude Lévi-Strauss, linguist Roman
> Jakobson, and psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan.

### 197

Sociologists (primarily in the United States) have focused their study on
gathering vast quantities of empirical data about the present conditions of
contemporary social life, but have failed to fully grasp the complete object of
their study because their critique limits itself to the purely social and
economic perspective of an object that itself contains their critique. As a
result, this isolated sociology can only make small suggestions to reform
society within spectacular ideology, but cannot step beyond this ideologic
frame. This sociology can only make changes that are either rooted in claims to
morality, moderation, common sense; suggestions that are all irrelevant when it
comes to making practical changes to the everyday material basis of society.
Since this critique is only examining the superficial symptoms of spectacular
society, it is only able to make superficial recommendations in regard to
symptoms, not its causes. The lack of a deep consciousness of history and the
root ideology of spectacular society leaves this realm of discourse completely
ignorant to the underlying issues at hand. This critique can only ever describe
a surface irritation affecting an otherwise perfect world—hence as an apologia
for the continuation of the status quo. Thus, the critique of this sociology
becomes a false goodwill, directing outrage at symptoms but directing energy
away from the deep underlying causes to which it is most ignorant. Ultimately it
_apologizes_ for the problems of the system while reinforcing its underlying
basis with its presuppositions and methods.

### 198

Those who criticize the wastefulness of "disposable" products and planned
obsolescence within the society of economic abundance do not understand the
necessity of waste under the reign of capitalism. These critics condemn waste
with ingratitude, but without this waste, the capitalism they promote would
collapse. In _The Image_ Daniel Boorstin describes the conspicuous consumption
of commodities and manufactured news events created to satisfy an endless
consumer appetite for novelty and celebrity. He is never is able to arrive at
the concept of Spectacle because he preemptively restricts his critique of
conspicuous consumption to unscrupulous advertising and frivolous purchasing
behaviors on the part of the consumer; exempting an erroneous concept he terms
"honest commodities" sold with presumably "honest ads" to presumably "honest
consumers". His critique is undertheorized since it treats private life from the
corporate excesses he deplores, and fails to grasp the all-encompassing nature
of the spectacle, where the social consumption of the spectacular image
ultimately corrupts all it touches: the advertising spectacle, the commodity,
and finally the consumer himself.

> "Those who criticize the wastefulness of 'disposable' products": Probably an
> indirect reference to "The Waste Makers" by Vance Packard. In this book
> Packard recoined the term "consumerism" from a positive term describing a
> healthy socio-economic system of abundance to one with connotations of excess
> materialism and vapid trend-following, generating massive waste. See Packard,
> V., 1963.

> "The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America" See Boorstin, D., 1992.

> "honest ads": Ironically enough, The Honest Ads Act is a bill in the United
> States Senate legislature regulating campaign advertisements placed online by
> advertising companies such as Facebook and Google.

> "the social consumption of the spectacular image ultimately corrupts all it
> touches" Even when the humble wood-nail purchased by the weekend home
> carpenter is aspiring to build his home in _the image_ of the spectacular
> American Dream, as a symbol of having "made it", more than as a home of
> spectacular convenience, and even more than the practicality of the home
> itself.

### 199

In The Image, Daniel Boorstin describes the excesses of conspicuous consumption
and the predominance of mass produced images as something inherently alien to
late-capitalism. His analysis of the superficial reign of images implies a
"normal" (or non-excessive) basis of social life, a fanciful ideal that has no
basis in reality, either in his book or in his lifetime. He implicitly grounds
his criticism of contemporary society against this normal strawman, with his
moralizing and psychologized judgements, attributing our drives to excess that
are a product of "our extravagant pretensions." Boorstin's strawman is one that
already existed in our past as the society centered on submission to religion, a
society whose time has concluded. His strawman blinds him to the contemporary
arrangement of society around images, advertising, and conspicuous consumption.
This leaves his critique without comprehension of the true depth of society's
reliance on images. The truth of this society is nothing other than the
_negation_ of this society.

### 200

Boorstin's sociology is one that considers industrial rationality as concerns
independent from daily life; one that is likewise liable to consider
communications technology and systems of mass production as separate from
general economic development. Thus, his analysis arbitrarily separates the
improvements in the technological means of the mass production of images from
the excessive appetite for sensationalism on the part of the public; instead he
finds merely "unfortunate" symptoms and can never discover underlying causes.
This amounts to blaming the spectacle on our individuals desire to be mere
spectators. Boorstin does not understand the proliferation of the
"pseudo-events" he so deplores. This stems from the simple fact that the
overwhelming reality of today's social and media existence prevents people from
actually experiencing events themselves. Actual history remains a spectre
haunting contemporary society, forever risking the status quo if individuals
became generally conscious of history. The spectacle must fabricate
pseudo-history at all sites of the consumption of daily life in order to
preserve the threatened balance of contemporary _frozen time_.

> "pseudo-events": Media spectacles, according to Boorstin, in a limited sense,
> those manufactured by the media and labeled "the news"; in a wider sense, the
> cultural artifacts produced by the spectacle for consumption by spectators as
> the replacement for lived experience.

> "actual history remains a spectre haunting contemporary society": C.f. the
> first line of The Communist Manifesto, "A specter is haunting Europe", see
> Marx, K., Engels, F. & Jones, G., 2002. Debord using this quote to gesture
> towards Marxist practice: were our society to become conscious of history, we
> would be inclined to overturn the status quo of unchanging spectacular time,
> and recreate our own events in our own period, transforming them from
> alienating pseudo-events to directly experienced "lived time", events of our
> own making, creating our own historical time.

### 201

The current trend of _structuralist_ analysis is based on an explicit or
unconscious assumption that our unchanging contemporary period will continue to
last forever. This is an ahistorical mode of thinking that refuses to consider
the material basis of a system that was never created and will never come to an
end. This thinking has its roots in a misunderstanding of structural linguistics
and anthropology, using its models and methods inappropriately from the start,
models that had _already been proven invalid in their original contexts_, and
continuing to misapply them to the current period. The continuation of this
irrational rationality is due to the instant gratification for a group of
academic _middle-managers_ who continue to be fascinated by the success of their
own models to describe a fantasy world designed only to prove the accuracy of
their models. Ultimately their models simplify existing reality to fit within
the constraints of their models—all error is attributed to an unfortunate
externality to the otherwise perfection of their models.

### 202

In order to make sense of any of the "structuralist" theories, you must presume
the existing material conditions of existence (which are, in fact, a product of
history) and only then do the theories hold. These theories are not only
theories of form, but tightly bound to existing conditions without which they
would not hold true on their own. Just as one would not judge the character of a
man based upon his appraisal of himself, one cannot trust the judgement of
society based upon a critique that was funded by society and speaking its
official language to itself. "We cannot judge such a period of transformation by
its own consciousness; on the contrary, that consciousness must be explained in
the light of the contradictions of material life…" Structure is the daughter of
present power. Structuralism is the _official thought of power, sponsored by the
state_, a form of thought that regards the present conditions of spectacular
"communication" as a natural and absolute fact that is and must remain.
Structuralism's limited observation of the resulting product, not the basis of
spectacular communication fails to see the complete picture and serves only to
reinforce the top-down hierarchy of communication from those in power to those
without. Thus, it is not structuralism that serves to prove the validity of the
society of the spectacle (since it is ill-equipped), but on the contrary, it is
the society of the spectacle, imposing itself upon reality and underwriting it
such that it appears to prove the frozen fantasy of structuralism.

> "Just as one would not judge the character of a man…": Paraphrased from Marx,
> K., 1970.

> "We cannot judge such a period…": Quoted from Marx, K., 1970.

> "Structure is the daughter of present power" A reference to Jonathan Swift:
> "Praise is the daughter of present power", see Swift, J., 2007.

### 203

Without a doubt, the critical concept of "the spectacle" is susceptible to
recuperation by capitalism, twisting it into an empty sociologico-political
talking point designed to apologize for the status quo and thus attempt to
rationalize the necessity of the spectacle. This empty rhetoric will denounce
the _entirety of the existing order in abstract terms_ but will offer no
alternatives, thus reinforcing the spectacular system. Such discourse proclaims:
obviously no ideas can lead beyond the spectacle—but they can only generate new
ideas about the spectacle. To effectively destroy the society of the spectacle,
people must utilize both theory, and, more importantly, those who put practical
force into action. Any critical theory of the spectacle can only be validated if
it is put into motion by the practical actions that move in opposition to, and
against the spectacle in order to negate it. This practical movement is the
rebirth of a revolutionary class struggle, and only through its practical
actions can it create its own historical events during a period of its own
making—and in doing so may it become conscious of itself as a master of its own
period, surrounded and embedded in a historical chronicle and material
conditions that lead to its current place. Thus it develops a critique of the
spectacle, which is the theory of its material basis in reality, revealing the
conditions of its oppression. With these conditions revealed, only then is it
clear what strategies of negation to oppose the spectacle could be, and
conversely reveals the secret of what this movement can be. Together, the theory
and practical strategies should expect no miracles from the working class. The
working class, as well practiced in work, will always be up to the task at hand.
The theory and strategy will envision a reconstitution of the basis of society
at the demands of the working class, and views this as a long-term task. Make no
mistake, there is no distinction between theory and practice of the negation of
the spectacle, as laid out here, the constitution and communication of a theory
of this kind cannot exist without _rigourous practice_. One always informs and
reinforces the other. It is certain that the paths of obscure and difficult
critical theory must be trodden by those working on the practical actions at the
scale of society.

> "…no ideas can lead beyond the spectacle—but they can only generate new ideas
> about the spectacle": C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 2002 (Ch VI 3.c), full quote
> is "Ideas can never lead beyond an old world order but only beyond the ideas
> of the old world order… In order to carry out ideas men are needed who can
> exert practical force."

> "the theory and practical strategies should expect no miracles from the
> working class" C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1998 (Section 3). Full quote is
> "The working class did not expect miracles from the Commune."

### 204

The critical theory of the spectacle must be _communicated_ in its own
language—the language of contradiction, where words and meanings must be
reappropriated from their debased and bankrupt meanings in contemporary usage,
and either restored or reinvented. This critique must be dialectical in both
form and content, proposing a utopian vision as its thesis, its practical steps
to achieve actual change as its synthesis, and a fully comprehensive critique of
the historical and material basis of the present state of oppression as its
antithesis. It is not some "writing degree zero"—a text devoid of meaning and
substance, but the opposite; a text pregnant with substance and significance.
This critique must not be a negation of style, but a style of critique capable
of communicating the negation of the society of the spectacle.

> "where words and meanings… restored or reinvented.": This sentence is not in
> the original text, but I've added it for additional clarity. Spectacular
> society continually strips words of their meaning through repetition in
> debased contexts, or recouperates their meaning through capture in ad
> campaigns and the spectacular media. It is the task of critical theory to
> clearly showcase the debasement of language and reappropriate it in order to
> communicate its final critique.

> "proposing a utopian vision as its thesis… the present state of oppression as
> its antithesis": Not in the original text, but added to clarify what is a
> reference to an applied methodology used by Hegel.

> "writing degree zero": A form and style of writing independent of language,
> one totally stripped of substance and meaning, leaving nothing but the text
> itself; writing unto itself, for its own sake. See Barthes, R., 1970.

### 205

The very style of dialectical theory is an abomination to the prevailing
standards of language, corrupting the sensibilities of those who use these
standards. While this theory uses existing concepts, it knowingly rediscovers
the _fluidity_ of these concepts, and the inevitability of their destruction.

> "The very style of dialectical theory… and the inevitability of their
> destruction." C.f. _Marx's Afterword to the Second German Edition of Capital_.
> See also Marx, K., Mandel, E., Fowkes, B. & Fernbach, D., 1978. While this
> theory uses terms from existing and seemingly concrete concepts, it uses them
> knowing the fluidity of concepts renders the semantic meaning pliable to
> subversion and ultimately, the undermining of the existing conditions of
> oppression.

### 206

The style of exposition in dialectical theory must be an exemplar of mastery of
the form of critique, including a critique of itself, a dominating account of
all of the historical works _of its entire past_. This style of expository
critical writing will thus exemplify the negative spirit in its style as much as
its contrarian and negating content. The truth, says Hegel, does not "remain
detached..., like a finished article from the instrument that shapes it." This
dialectical theory is the communication of a movement, a movement whose history
and actions must remain visible; this is kept visible by the overthrowing of the
presently authoritative relationships between concepts held together by lies;
this is accomplished by the _détournement_ of all previously successful critical
efforts—which is to say, the reappropriation, misappropriation, or outright
hijacking of previous critical efforts into new critical forms. Hegel was a
pioneer of his epigrammatic style, where his practice of reversing the genitive
became his way to distill historical revolutions into a mechanism of thought.
The young Marx was influenced by the writing style of Feuerbach's systemic
reversal of subject and predicate, and by borrowing from it he was able to
achieve the most cogent development of this _insurrectional style_ of writing,
thus a phrase like "the philosophy of poverty" becomes "the poverty of
philosophy". The technique of détournement re-radicalizes previously critical
conclusions that have been recuperated by the spectacle and thus turned into
safe and official lies. Kierkegaard had also made use of détournement
deliberately, and made his own comment on the subject: "but despite all your
twists and turns, just as the jam always return to the pantry, you always manage
to introduce some little word or phrase which isn't yours which triggers
disturbing memories." It remains important however, that the use of détournement
requires maintaining one's _distance_ towards whatever has been turned into
falsified "official truths" according to the spectacle. Later in his book,
"Philosophical Fragments" he opines on the topic of détournement "one further
remark on your many complaints that I've introduced borrowed expressions into my
exposition. I do not deny that I did so, nor should I conceal the fact that I've
done so deliberately. In the next section of this work, if I ever write such a
section, I intend to call this topic by its true name, and clothe the problem in
its historical costume."

> "[nor does truth] remain detached from diversity, like a finished article from
> the instrument that shapes it.": See Hegel, G., 2013. This is to say, the
> critical theory communicates its ideas using contrarian language and style,
> but its final analysis is always subject to the biases of its language.

> reversing the genitive: Reversing the possessive pronoun with the possessed
> noun, e.g. "The police arrested the rioters" becomes "the rioters arrested the
> police".

> "The Philosophy of Poverty" was written by Proudhon in 1846, which Marx
> answered with "The Poverty of Philosophy" in 1847.

> "but despite all your twists and turns…": See Kierkegaard, S., Hong, H. &
> Hong, E., 1985.

> détournement: The original French word (day-tor-n­uh-maw) means to detour,
> reroute, misappropriate, to purposefully hijack.

> "one further remark on your many complaints…" See Kierkegaard, S., Hong, H. &
> Hong, E., 1985.

### 207

Ideas improve. The meaning of words, freshly imbued with détoured semantics,
participate in the development of these ideas. Plagiarism is necessary, progress
demands ideas embracing the author's phrasing, exploiting their expressions,
erasing an official lie and replacing it with correct ones.

> "Plagiarism is necessary": C.f. Lautréamont. & Lykiard, A., 1994. Lautréa­mont
> was the pseudonym of Isidore Ducasse (1846-1870), the mysterious author of
> _Maldoror_ and _Poesies_, both of which make extensive use of détournement. In
> Debord's autobiographical work _Panegy­ric_ he described his experi­ence of
> storms in the mountainous re­gion of central France, "Just once, at night, I
> saw lightning strike near me outside; you could not even see where it had
> struck; the whole landscape was equally illuminated for one startling instant.
> Nothing in art has ever given me this impression of an irrevocable brilliance,
> except for the prose that Lautréamont employed in the pro­grammatic exposition
> that he called Poesies."

### 208

Détournement is the opposite of quotation, that seemingly official authority
that is immediately false because it has been quoted—which is to tear a fragment
from its context, from its original inertia to lend itself to new inertia, torn
from its original frame of reference within the text and time period in which it
lived, to one that is either appropriate or erroneous. Détournement, is the
flexible language of anti-ideology. This language is aware of its inability to
always guarantee the same semantic meaning definitively, and makes no claims to
certainty, today nor tomorrow. It is a language that cannot be confirmed by any
previous or supra-critical reference, the language is self-referential only. The
language of détournement contains its own internal coherence, and is adequate in
as much as the practices it makes possible are then validated in the realities
of daily life. It is only the success of this practice that validates the core
kernels of truth détournement has brought back into play. Détournement grounds
the basis of its cause and claims on nothing but its own truth as critique of
contemporary spectacular society.

> "Détournement grounds the basis of its cause and claims on nothing…": C.f.
> Stirner, M. & Leopold, D., 1995. Full quote is "I have found my cause on
> nothing" from the original German: "Ich hab' Mein Sach' auf Nichts gestellt"
> is the opening line of Goethe's poem _Vanitas! Vanitatum vanitas!_ which
> Stirner used as the opening and closing sentence in _The Ego and Its Own._

> "The language of détournement contains… the realities of daily life.": To
> phrase more simply: detourned theory, when put into practice
> successfully—becomes self-verifying.

### 209

To include an element of _overt_ détournement in any theoretical work is to
explicitly eliminate any potentially autonomous or durable dogmatism from the
resulting work. Introducing détourement directly into theoretical discourse is
to inject the same type of _violent subversion_ that disrupts and overthrows
every existing authority that upholds the status quo—not with actions, but with
ideas. Détournement reminds us that theory is nothing by itself, it must be put
into action with the full consciousness of its material basis in history and
only theory and practice truly allied can manifest the _historical correction_
that is its own validation.

> "Détournement reminds us that theory is nothing by itself…" To put simply:
> Detourned theories are musical instruments, inert and quiet unless played. Our
> task is to play loudly and more beautifully. The world only changes when our
> listeners are moved by the music and change the world accordingly.

### 210

The real negation of culture is the only way to keep its value; as the actions,
traditions, and elements of daily life. The negation of cultural culture can not
be merely _cultural_. What shall remain of culture when we negate or oppose its
cultural aspects will be one that remains at the level of everyday life, a life
that is universally accessible, imbued with renewed meaning, and points to a
direction beyond itself.

> "The negation of cultural culture can not be merely cultural": The original
> French is "La négation réelle de la culture est seule à en conserver le sens.
> Elle ne peut plus être culturelle", roughly "Only the negation of culture
> retains its truth. It can no longer be cultural". To oppose dominant culture
> with "counterculture" isn't sufficient, as it can never negate the entire
> non-cultural social field. Culture will always be captured by capital and
> become autonomous unto itself. Put simply: Culture can no longer be
> independent and self-justifying.

### 211

The language of contradiction, détournement, is a _unified_ critique of culture,
in so far as it dominates the whole of culture, its knowledge as
poetry—manifesting itself as an integrated form of theory aligned with practice
that is not separable from a critique of the social totality. This _unified
theoretical critique_ of all of society goes along with its manifestation as a
_unified social practice_.
