::::: {.chapter}

## <span class="ch-roman">IX.</span> Ideology Materialized {title="Ideology Materialized"}

> _"Self-consciousness exists in itself and for itself only insofar as it exists
> in and for another self-consciousness; that is, it exists only by being
> recognized and acknowledged."_
>
> —Hegel, _The Phenomenology of Spirit_

:::::

::::: {.sidenotes}

### 212

Ideology[
  Ideology: the general social consensus around beliefs that are commonly
  accepted as true—which may not be.
]{#fn212.1 .fn}
is the intellectual _basis_ of class societies throughout the course of
all established history, a history rife with conflict[
  "a history rife with conflict": History is indeed rife with conflict, but
  infrequently conflicts over the bases of ideology.
]{#fn212.2 .fn}.
Ideological facts were never pure fictions or outright falsehoods, but rather
distorted perspectives of the nature of reality, misunderstood causation, or
oversimplified narratives.  These forms have been major factors that have and
continue to influence human actions that go on to produce actual distorting
effects on reality itself. These distorting effects gradually produce a
_materialization_ of the very ideology that underpin the human actions performed
in response to the distortions of ideology. Ideology materializes in the form of
the spectacle, through the concrete human actions brought about through systems
of autonomous economic production. The resulting social reality is built upon
the effects of an autonomous system of false belief leading to actions that
create a reality custom-tailored to reflect the false model of reality: this is
ideology materialized. In this way, ideology remodels reality in its own image,
and becomes self-confirming.

### 213[The spectacle has transformed what was formerly ideological theory into the universal and common understanding of reality itself, manifesting an oversimplified model into reality. This is how a distorted map becomes the very territory upon which we walk. Ideology turns what were formerly official lies first into common sense, then into physical existence.]{#fn213.0 .sidenote}{#t213 data-bookmark-label="213"}

When ideology, which is the _abstract_ will of a universal reality and its
illusion made manifest, finds itself legitimized by universal abstraction and
the effective dictatorship of illusion in contemporary society, there is no
longer a need for this ideology to prove its own claims, it is no longer a
voluntarist struggle of a multiplicity of perspectives, but the triumph of the
universal ideology of spectacle. Thus, it is no longer ideology; all competing
ideologies cease to exist. What was previously considered historical choices are
now accepted as obvious facts, what were once ideologic pretensions are now
reality[
  "what were ideologic pretensions are now reality…": Baudrillards' _Simulacra
  and Simulation_ traverses the same terrain as Debord, which is to say: what
  were once models of reality, but were in fact oversimplifications, have the
  pretense of _being_ reality. These are not reflections of reality, nor
  perversions of reality—what had the pretense of reality is now fully
  simulacrum—that which bears no relation to reality whatsoever, that which has
  become "fully hyperreal". See Baudrillard, J. 1994.
]{#fn213.1 .sidenote}.
Even the _names_ of alternative ideologies cease to exist as they are
irrelevant to the new basis of reality. What was previously considered
specifically ideologically oriented labor is now the "epistemological base" that
is simply presumed to be without ideology: mere assertions of undeniable fact.
Materialized ideology at this point has no _name_, no historical agenda, and it
pretends to play the role of the nature of this materialized reality, it is the
"way it is" and "the way it will always be"[
  "it is the 'way it is' and 'the way it will always be'". Francis Fukuyama gave
  a name to this concept as "The End of History." in which he describes the
  collapse of socialism in the USSR as the final victory of neoliberal
  capitalism: the only remaining ideological vision to describe the terrain,
  organization, and reality of human society. Debord, twenty five years earlier
  had described it succinctly here in the original French as
  <q lang="fr">l'histoire des idéologies est finie</q> or "the history of
  ideologies is over." See Fukuyama, F., 1992.
]{#fn213.2 .sidenote}.
This amounts to saying that the history _of coexisting ideologies_ is over.

### 214

Ideology has its own internal logic that gradually leads to what Mannheim calls
"total ideology"[
  "Total ideology": See Mannheim, K., 1985.
]{#fn214.1 .sidenote}.
Total ideology is a state of reality in which the theoretical
ideas and perspective of social theory are manifested as common sense
consciousness of reality—a despotic theory of oversimplification and a
fragmentary perspective accepted as the _total_ understanding of reality, albeit
a reality that is frozen, unchallenged and unquestioned. This worldview is a
_totalitarian_ vision that distorts all perceptions into a singular false
image—one presented through the spectacle as a series of pseudo-events in which
the individual has no ability to participate; a series of non-events that are
ordained as historically significant by the spectacle, but are in fact
non-historical. Ideology is fulfilled when it fully dissolves into the whole of
society, both underwriting it and disappearing. It is only with the _practical
dissolution_ of society can the _final delusion_ which blocks access to our
participation in the historical events of the contemporary period, also
disappear.

### 215

The spectacle is the ideology par excellence, for once manifest in its complete
form, it exhibits the essence of all ideological systems: the
oversimplification, impoverishment, and the very negation of real life; the
reduction of beauty to banality. The spectacle has an impact on real life,
materially it is "the expression of estrangement, of alienation between man and
man"[
  "the expression of estrangement, of alienation between man and man": Quote
  from Marx, K. & Engels, F. 1988 (Section "Alienated Labor").
]{#fn215.1 .sidenote}—which
is to say, it presents a unique perspective of reality for each,
isolating each on false islands of separate reality[
  "isolating each on a false island of separate reality": Since _The Society of
  the Spectacle_ was written, we've witnessed a quantitative proliferation of
  images, but also of qualitatively personalized content. Commercial social
  media companies like Facebook, Youtube, and Netflix lead this charge,
  isolating individuals onto islands of their own personalized media, but the
  next phase of innovation points beyond personalized _choice of content_ to
  _personalized content_ whereby media is customized for each individual—leaving
  them unable to relate their perspectives with others. For more on this, see
  0xADADA, 2021 (January 14).
]{#fn215.2 .sidenote}.
Through this isolation arises "the new power of deception"[
  "the new power of deception": ibid.
]{#fn215.3 .sidenote}
which is the basis of all spectacular power.
It is the increase in the production of images, TV, film, and social
media—"within the mass of objects grows the mass of alien powers to which man is
subjected"[
  "within the mass of objects… to which man is subjected": Ibid., section "Human
  Requirements".
]{#fn215.4 .sidenote}
and the personalization and customization of this media which has
enabled an alien power of deception, demanding a shift in our attention to the
spectacle, which is mistaken for real life. This state of alienated unreality is
the supreme stage of expansion of the spectacle, which has finally replaced
lived experience with need. "The need for money is for that reason the real need
created by the modern economic system, and the only need it creates."[
  "The need for money is for that reason the real need created by the modern
  economic system, and the only need it creates.": C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F. 
  1988 (Section "Human Requirements"). The rise of social
  media has augmented the need for money with the need for social validation on
  social media, as described by Jenny Odell: "we submit even our leisure for
  numerical evaluation via likes on Facebook and Instagram, constantly checking
  on its performance like one checks a stock, monitoring the ongoing development
  of our personal brand." See Odell, J., 2019.
]{#fn215.5 .sidenote}
This was
elaborated upon by Hegel, <q id="dead">the life of the dead body, that moves 
itself within itself</q>[
  "the life of the dead body, that moves itself within itself": See Hegel, G.,
  Harris, H. & Knox, T. 1979. See note for [thesis 2](#fn2.1) for the complete 
  quotation.
]{#fn215.6 .sidenote},
which is to say, the spectacle turns all human decisions into
considerations of economic value, weighed and distorted by the decision to need
more money and improve wealth above all other considerations—the privileging of
money over life itself.

### 216

The spectacle stands directly in opposition to the theory laid out in Marx's
_Theses on Feuerbach_[
  "Theses on Feuerbach": See Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1998.
]{#fn216.1 .sidenote}—his project of a philosophy that realizes a practice
able to transcend the opposition between materialism and idealism. The spectacle
imposes a false consciousness[
  "The spectacle imposes a false consciousness": The spectacle, once fully
  realized, is able to impose its total ideology of false reality upon both the
  material aspects of daily life as well as ideology itself—using the economic
  effects of production in the creation, promotion and reproduction of distorted
  perspectives of reality that act directly upon the shaping of our perceptions,
  emotions, and aspirations.
]{#fn216.2 .sidenote}
of reality not merely based upon its materiality
but simultaneously by pseudo-concreteness of the spectacular universe it
presents. The older and outmoded discourse of materialism (that earlier form
leaned upon by Marx that idealized and privileged the purely material nature of
reality[
  "…privileged the purely material nature of reality": Historical materialism
  stipulates that all of present reality is made up _only_ by the configuration
  of the physical material objects in the world _and_ the history leading up to
  that configuration. The human ideologies that _produced_ that configuration
  are totally discounted.
]{#fn216.3 .sidenote})—is finally fulfilled by the spectacle, where human
actions are subjugated by the commodity. The material commodity has finally
become the
automatic master of social life, shaping the world to its own needs. Similarly,
the _dreamed activity_ of idealism (or that which is purely ideological) is also
fulfilled in the spectacle, through the technical mediation of images and media;
that realm of signs and signals repeated often enough to change perceptions of
reality and to enact behaviors—which ultimately materialize an abstract
ideal[
  "ultimately materialize an abstract ideal": What were once abstract concepts,
  theories, and dreams have become a waking nightmare made manifest.
]{#fn216.4 .sidenote}.

### 217

Joseph Gabel, in his book _False Consciousness_[
  _False Consciousness_: See Gabel, J., 1975.
]{#fn217.1 .sidenote} draws a parallel between
ideology and schizophrenia, this relationship should be considered in the
context of the spectacles' domineering influence on the economic process of
production that manifests concrete reality. Society has become what ideology
already was. Wherever the spectacle dominates there is the promotion of its
false perspective of reality, a disintegration of the practice of everyday life
and the anti-dialectic false consciousness that accompanies it. This repression
is imposed at every moment of daily life subjected to the spectacle. The
repression of the practice of lived experience should be understood as an
organized attempt to destroy the "faculty to encounter"—our very ability to
perceive, experience, participate, and enjoy the realities of daily life;
replacing this faculty with a _social hallucination_. The social hallucination
is a falsified proxy for experience, an "illusion of encounter"[
  "illusion of encounter": The illusion of encounter is the experience of
  manufactured pseudo-events, participation in the spectating of real events, or
  witness of the non-events of mass media. That which was once real is replaced
  by that which is proxied, virtualized, or simply spectated upon.
]{#fn217.2 .sidenote}.
Within this
alienated terrain, we are unable to _recognize_ others, and unable to recognize
our own reality. It is here where ideology is home, and alienation has built its
own reality for us each[
  "alienation has built its own reality for us each": The original French was
  <q lang="fr">la séparation a bâti son monde</q> or "separation has built its
  world". Separation is felt concretely with the elimination of lived and
  therefore shareable experiences, entailing the direct replacement of social
  bonds with relations that are mediated by technology, relationships _to_
  technology rather than to each other, e.g. Facebook.
]{#fn217.3 .sidenote}[
  "It is here where ideology is home, and alienation has built its own reality
  for us each.": See Proverbs 9:1, "Wisdom has built her house, she has carved
  out its seven pillars."
]{#fn217.4 .sidenote}.

### 218[This thesis describes the apogee of the spectacle, a life in which one does not live through their own actions and experiences, but delegating them to a false mediator, in this case the celebrity. As the mediator themselves merely acts out these actions and experiences, no experience is ever actually experienced; thus all lived experience is staged, what remains of all our lives is a form of autism—disconnection from ourselves and others, surrounded by a cacophony of sensory input. The spectacle is a pair of glasses we wear, "correcting" our vision of reality.]{#fn218.0 .sidenote .sidenote-l}{#t218 data-bookmark-label="218"}

"In clinical descriptions of schizophrenia", says Gabel in _False
Consciousness_, "the disintegration of the dialectic of totality (with
dissociation as its extreme form) and the disintegration of the dialectic of
becoming (with catatonia as its extreme form) seem closely interrelated."[
  "In clinical descriptions of schizophrenia… seem closely interrelated": See
  Gabel, J., 1975.
]{#fn218.1 .sidenote}
Accordingly, the
spectacle disintegrates the universe of lived reality and human experience only
to replace it with a life imprisoned behind screens, a flattened image of
reality which has separated the individual from reality itself. Bound up within
this false reality on all sides by screens, we become mere spectators unable to
participate in meaningful activity, alienated from the events that make up the
narrative of our lives, we no longer recognize our friends or family, or even
ourselves. We only recognize the celebrities, those _fictitious interlocutors_
of the spectacle as the mouthpiece of merchandise, subjecting us to a one-way
dialog promoting the consumption of their commodities as the means to articulate
our politics. The spectacle in its totality is our "mirror sign"[
  "mirror sign": Translated from the French <q lang="fr">signe du miroir</q> is
  a psychiatric term referring to a schizophrenics inability to recognize
  oneself in the mirror, and obsessively observing that illusion and mistaking
  it as a genuine encounter with another person.
]{#fn218.2 .sidenote},
a false reflection mistaken for reality itself—yet we see nothing but
dramatizations of escape from this socialized form of autism.

### 219

The spectacle obliterates the boundary between self and world by crushing the
self beneath a constant siege that saturates perceptions of lived experience
with the continual presence / absence of the world[
  "a constant siege that saturates perceptions of lived experience with the
  continual presence / absence of the world": The original French is
  <q lang="fr">qu'assiège la présence-absence du monde</q> or "besiege the
  presence-absence of the world". Douglas Rushkoff refers to this concept as it
  manifests in technology as _presentism_, an obsession with the now at the
  expense of the future and the past, a continual present. In the face of this
  obsession, we "end up reacting to the ever-present assault of simultaneous
  impulses and commands." See Rushkoff, D., 2013. Jenny Odell aptly described
  our contemporary state of reactionary social media as it saturates our
  experience thus: "social media so often feels like firecrackers setting off
  other firecrackers in a very small room that soon gets filled with smoke." See
  Odell, J., 2019 (Pp. 60). The smoke, in this instance is the 'data exhaust'
  that turbocharges the engine of Surveillance Capitalism as described in
  Zuboff, S., 2019.
]{#fn219.1 .sidenote}.
The spectacle obliterates
the distinctions of true and false by burying the true lived experiences of
reality beneath the _real presence_ of falsehood maintained by the predominance
of spectacular media. The individual is condemned to passive resignation to an
alien everyday reality—where one has little to no real lived experience except
through proxy or as mediated by media. Passive resignation results in symptoms
of insanity, the belief that the magic of conspicuous consumption is the only
pseudo-response available to the one-way communication that forms their
reality—that the repetition of buying grants access to real lived experience,
that is to say, buying things is lived experience. The consumers need to imitate
the images and modes of life portrayed in the spectacle is an infantile one, the
need to feel as participant in everyday life, the need for the
pseudo-necessities generated by the spectacle itself, and finally the need
determined by their actual dispossession of any actually lived experience. As
Gabel described a pathology: "the abnormal need for representation here makes up
for a torturing feeling of being on the edge of existence."[
  "the abnormal need for representation here makes up for a torturing feeling of
  being on the edge of existence.": See Gabel, J., 1975 (Pp. 199). This is to
  say, individuals attempt to recognize themselves and their subjective
  experience within the spectacle and reality, but are unable to find any as
  such. The only available reaction is to blindly search in the mode of
  consumption to fill a missing experience of reality with spectacular reality,
  thus exhibiting a form of schizophrenia.
]{#fn219.2 .sidenote}

### 220

What is considered academic discourse within the spectacular society is nothing
but false consciousness—spectacular thought, the official lies sponsored by the
spectacle. The critique offered by false consciousness is not capable of
grasping at its own underlying ideology, its logic cannot truthfully know
itself. The search for critical truth about the spectacle must be
comprehensively true criticism. This is a critique performed in both theory and
practice by those who are absolutely irreconcilable enemies of the spectacle,
and who must admit the critique is nothing without them[
  "What is considered academic discourse… the critique is nothing without
  them.": I've taken the liberty of changing this translation significantly by
  injecting phrases from previous theses by Debord, in hopes that it
  contextualizes his attack on spectacular thought as a critique blinded by the
  ideology of the spectacle.
]{#fn220.1 .sidenote}.
Actions that rush to
secure short term reformist concessions, or pseudo-revolutionary collective
actions in the present moment are driven by the abstract desire for immediate
effectiveness—falling prey to the ruling law of spectacular thought[
  "falling prey to the ruling law of spectacular thought…" This type of thought
  is evident as the reformist desire to move laterally from neoliberalism to
  something more like Keynesian social democracy—which puts limits on capital,
  limits that capital already knows how to overcome. Long-term solutions take
  long-term vision and practice, there is no room for short-term compromise that
  only maintains the current reign of the spectacle.
]{#fn220.2 .sidenote},
adopting the spectacular mindset, one in which we can expect nothing more than
to see an image of progress from the perspective of _tonights evening news_.
This is how delerium forms within the ranks of the very camp that claims to be
fighting it.  The critique seeking to move beyond the spectacle must _know how
to wait._

### 221

Self-emancipation in the contemporary period is emancipation from our material
basis within falsified reality. This "historic mission of establishing truth in
the world"[
  "historic mission of establishing truth in the world": c.f Marx, K., 1844. The
  full quotation is "The task of history is thus to establish the truth about
  this world once the otherworld has proved illusory."
]{#fn221.1 .sidenote}
can not be accomplished by the isolated individual nor by the
atomized and manipulated masses, but only and always by the "class that is able
to dissolve all classes"[
  "class that is able to dissolve all classes": Marx refers to the working
  class, quoted as "a class that is the dissolution of all classes." Ibid.
]{#fn221.2 .sidenote}
by returning power to the disalienating, participatory,
and universalized form of democracy. This is the power of the workers councils,
in which practical theory controls itself and self-validates with its own
actions. This can only be made possible when individuals are "directly linked to
world history"[
  "directly linked to world history": See Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1998 (Part I,
  Ch. 2, Section 5).
]{#fn221.3 .sidenote}—where dialog within the council arms itself to defeat its
own conditions.

:::::
