## Glossary {.centered}

::::: {.glossary}

Debord writes in a provocative style of classical French, often overloading
terms with meanings defined in other Situationist texts. This makes reading the
text impenetrable until his use of the terminology becomes apparent to the
reader through its consistent use.

### absolute lie (_mensonge absolu_)

The original French "mensonge absolu" or outright lying, or "the absolute lie"
is an idea Debord developed and often refers to, encompassing an ideology of
balanced contradictions that obscure the true nature of all social
relations—ones based on falsehoods.

### the autonomous economy (_l'économie autonome_)

In the spectacle, the product (i.e. the commodity) exists for its own sake,
external to any human desire, or even society itself, organizing economic
activity in order to reproduce itself.

### bourgeoisie / bourgeois

A class of people with a certain cultural and financial capital belonging to the
middle or upper middle class who stand opposite the proletariat class. From
"those who live in the borough", that is to say, the people of the city
(including merchants and craftsmen), as opposed to those of rural areas. The
city dweller was a legally defined class of the Middle Ages in France, that had
the rights of citizenship and political rights that rural peasants did not have,
as they were legally tied to the lands. Bourgeoisie is the class, Bourgeois is
the individual.

### chronicle (_La chronique_)

A story or narrative explaining the events of the _ruling classes_ leading up to
the present moment. The narrative is based upon a foundation of mythical
origins, and the wars, conquests, and personal events of its leaders, leading
directly to the contemporary moment.

### commodity fetishism

Part of Karl Marx's critique of political economy, the perception of the social
relationships involved in production not as relationships among people, but as
relationships among the money and commodities exchanged in market trade. As
such, commodity fetishism transforms what were previously subjective, abstract
aspects of economic value into objective, real things that people believe to
have intrinsic value. The gradual process of commodity fetishism results in the
alienation of the subject from contemporary historical time, which tends to
eliminate all experience and participation, except for the empty participation
in the consumption of ever-changing commodities.

### consciousness

The emergence of a universal understanding within a class of its own unified
history and the material conditions that constitute their cohesiveness as a
class. When the working class generally has 'consciousness', they understand the
nature and conditions of their own exploitation under capitalism. When this
occurs, most Marxist thinkers would agree that the conditions are ripe for the
working class to take control of the organization of society.

### cyclical time (_le temps cyclique_)

The time of agrarian societies, one in which nature recurs with time, the coming
and returning of the seasons and celestial bodies. Evidenced by nomadic peoples
journey to hunt and their return to pasture according to the migratory patterns
of wild game and local flora. This model of time dominated human societies until
the creation of subsistence farming villages. See thesis 126.

### détournement

The original French word (day-tor-n­uh-maw) means a diversion, a detour, a
rerouting, to misappropriate, to hijack on purpose. Turning expressions of the
capitalist system and its media culture against itself—as when slogans and logos
are turned against their advertisers or the political status quo. It means
_putting everything that was frozen back into play_, a game in which "all
components of a past culture must be reinvested, or else disappear." Vaneigem,
R., 2010 (Pp. 237).

### diffuse spectacle

A society in which individuals willingly participate in a society that is both
far more effective and efficient at subduing the masses, since it appears to
empower individuals through consumer choice. The diffuse spectacle of modern
capitalism reproduces itself by exploiting the spectator's desires and
dissatisfaction with an endless cycle of promises to satiate these desires and
then failing to do so; and yet offers another promise, an endless series of
unsatisfying consumer promises.

### historical time (_temps historique_)

A conception of time whereby the ruling class records their personal histories
with the narratives of personal events (see also, chronicle), conquests, wars,
battles and administrative events. These events mark changes in the material
world that provide a framework for the general society to understand their place
within reality.

### ideology

The generally accepted beliefs (both conscious and unconscious) that are
commonly accepted as true—which may not be. The hegemonic ideology is the
socially normative meta-idea that serve to explain the existing conditions of
reality. Debord argues that when the commodity becomes the "essential category"
of society, that is, when the process of commodification has developed to its
fullest extent, the image of society presented by commodity-ideology describes
all life as constituted by ideas and objects that derive their value as
commodities tradeable in terms of their exchange value (not necessarily even use
value), this in turn colonizes all aspects of life and reduces life to
representation, or as he calls it "non-life".

### irreversible time (_temps irréversible_)

As opposed to cyclical time, irreversible time is the perception of time as a
series of linear developments of progress in terms of the economy, technology,
knowledge, and personal chronicles. Within this framing, time does not recur,
but progresses along a fixed trajectory to the horizon. This is the time of
permanent agricultural settlements, villages, and towns. This new form of
irreversible time is irreversible in that it assumes the accumulation of
knowledge can only develop with a forward trajectory. For more on this subject,
see Braudel, F., 1982.

### lived time (_temps vécu_)

Debord's concept of lived time, originally "temps vécu" and also translated as
"lived experience" is a concept where an individual can directly experience,
participate, and contribute to the historical events and environment that
defines the era in which they live. Thus, lived time is opposed to commodity
fetishism.

### petty-bourgeois

A social class comprising a small business owning class, and the upper-middle
class whose personal identities are determined by an aspiration to the upper
class bourgeoisie. Their political and economic positions tend to imitate the
positions of the bourgeoisie class above them, although this position may not be
in their own best interests.

### pseudo-cyclical time (_temps pseudo-cyclique_)

Also called "consumable time" and "free time", this is time created outside the
time spent working (see time of production), largely weekends, holidays,
vacations, and festivals. It is the same as the time of production in that it is
a homogeneous, fungible, and equally segmented unit of time. This time is
subservient to time of production in that it is created as a by-product of
labor, given as a gift to the workers from the owners of the time of production.
It is valued more highly by the workers because of the ability to consume this
time freely.

### proletariat

Working-class people, contemporarily the "blue collar working class." From Latin
proletarius "producing offspring"), is the class of wage-earners in an economic
society whose only possession of significant material value is their
labor-power. A member of such a class is a proletarian.

### recuperation (_récupération_)

Recuperation is the process by which politically radical ideas and images are
diluted, twisted, co-opted, absorbed, defused, incorporated, annexed and
commodified within media culture and bourgeois society, and thus become
interpreted through a neutralized, innocuous or more socially conventional
perspective.

### separate power

A form of power inaccessible to the laboring and agrarian classes.

### time of production (_temps du travail_)

Time an individual spends working. The exploitable time of the laboring class.
In an industrialized society, it is the time that has been atomized, segmented,
allocated, and turned into a commodity where each slice of equal interval is
equivalent in value and indistinguishable. These slices of time are bought and
sold on a marketplace for labor. This time is the inverse of consumable time.

:::::
