### Preface to the Third French Edition {#preface}

_The Society of the Spectacle_ was first published in November 1967 in Paris by
Buchet-Chastel. The 1968 unrest made it famous. The book, of which I have never
changed a single word, was republished in 1971 by Éditions Champ Libre, who 
changed their name to Gérard Lebovici in 1984, after the publisher's
assassination. A series of reprints continued there regularly until 1991. The 
present edition,[
  "The present edition…": This preface was written for the Third French Edition
  published in 1992, four years after he had published _Comments on the Society
  of the Spectacle_, and roughly a year after the final collapse of the USSR
  (1989-1991). Debord died by suicide two years later, on November 30, 1994.
]{#fntfe.1 .fn}
too, has remained rigorously identical to the 1967 edition.  The same rule will
naturally apply to the reprinting of all my books at Gallimard. I am not one who
corrects myself.

Such a critical theory does not have to be changed; as long as the general
conditions of this period of history (that this theory was first to define 
accurately) have not been destroyed. The continued development of this period 
has only verified and illustrated the theory of the spectacle, whose 
presentation, reiterated here, can also be considered historical in a more 
limited sense: it testifies to what the most extreme position was at the time of
the quarrels of 1968, and therefore to the knowledge that was already possible 
to know in 1968. The worst dupes of that time have since learned, through the 
disappointments of their entire existence, what the <q>negation of life that 
has become visible</q>; the <q>loss of quality</q> linked to the 
commodity-form, and the <q>proletarianization of the world</q> has meant.

Over time, I also added other observations concerning the most remarkable 
developments that the subsequent course of the same process was to bring about.
In 1979, on the occasion of a preface for a new Italian translation, I dealt
with the effective transformations in the very nature of industrial production,
as well as in the techniques of government, which began an authorized use of 
spectacular force. In 1988, the _Comments on the Society of the Spectacle_
clearly established that the previous <q>worldwide division of spectacular 
labor</q>, between the rival reigns of the <q>concentrated spectacle</q> and the
<q>diffuse spectacle</q>, had now ended[
  "the rival reigns… had now ended": Debord is pointing to the ideologic rivalry
  between the diffuse spectacle exemplified by U.S. capitalism and the
  concentrated spectacle exemplified by the communism of the USSR. His book,
  _Comments on the Society of the Spectacle_ was published a year before the
  collapse of the USSR, but he had predicted this collapse by describing the
  failure of the concentrated spectacle. Amazingly, two of 
  Debords' major works: _The Society of the Spectacle_ and _Comments on the
  Society of the Spectacle_ were published just one year
  prior to two major worldwide upheavals: Spectacle published a year before
  May 1968 in Paris, and Comments a year before the beginning of collapse of
  the USSR.
]{#fntfe.2 .fn}
in favor of their fusion, into the universal form of the <q>integrated
spectacle</q>.

This fusion can be summarized summarily by correcting [thesis 105](#ref105.0)
which, touching on what had happened before 1967, still distinguished the 
earlier forms according to some opposing practices. The Great Schism of class
power having ended in reconciliation, it must be said that the unified practice
of the integrated spectacle, today, has <q>economically transformed the 
world</q>, _at the same time_ that it has <q>used police methods to transform
perceptions</q> (The police in this case, are of a new specialized variety).

Only because this merger had already occurred in the economic and political
realms of the entire world, could the world finally proclaim itself officially
unified. It is also because this situation that the universally separated power
has reached such a predicament that this world needed to be reunited as soon as
possible; to function as one block in the same consensual organization of the
single global market, _falsified_ and guaranteed by the spectacle. In the end it
will not be unified.

The totalitarian bureaucracy, that <q>dominant substitute class for the market
economy</q>, had never believed much in its destiny. It knew itself to be an
<q>underdeveloped form of dominant class,</q> and it wanted to be better.
Thesis 58 had long established the following axiom: <q>[As the spectacle is
founded upon an economy of abundance, the fruits of that economy tend to
dominate the spectacular market within its sphere of influence](#fruits)</q>.

It is this desire to modernize and unify the spectacle, combined with all other
efforts to simplify society, that in 1989 led the Russian bureaucracy to
suddenly convert itself, as one body, to the present _ideology_ of democracy:
that is, to the dictatorial freedom of the Market, tempered by the recognition
of the Rights of Homo Spectator. No one in the West had ever once commented on
the meaning and consequences of such an extraordinary media event. The progress
of spectacular technology demonstrates this. Only the occurrence of a minor
geologic tremor had been registered in the media. The phenomenon was dated, and
is deemed to be sufficiently well understood, by simply repeating the very
simple slogan-"the fall of the Berlin Wall"-which was just as indisputable as
all other _symbols of democracy_.

In 1991, the first effects of modernization appeared with the complete collapse
of Russia. There it is expressed, even more clearly than in the West, the
disastrous result of the general development of the economy. This disorder
reigning in the East is only one consequence of that development. Everywhere
the same dreadful question will be asked, the one that has haunted the world for
two centuries: how can we make the poor work, when illusion has disappointed and
when force has been defeated?

Thesis 111, which recognized the first symptoms of a Russian decline, the final
explosion of which we have already seen, and envisaged the forthcoming
disappearance of a world society which, as we can say now, _will be erased from
the computer's memory_, formulated the following strategic judgment, the
correctness of which should become obvious: ["In the final analysis, the collapse
and failure of global alliances founded on bureaucratic mystification is an
unfavorable aspect of the development of capitalist
society."](#ref111.1){#fntfe.3}

This book should be read considering that it was knowingly written with the
intention of damaging the spectacular society. It never said anything
outrageous.

June 30, 1992\
GUY DEBORD

