::::: {.chapter}

## <span class="ch-roman">II.</span> The Commodity as Spectacle {title="The Commodity as Spectacle"}

> _"The [commodity]{.ix data-ix="commodities"} can be understood in its
> undistorted essence only when it becomes the universal category of society as
> a whole. Only in this context does the [reification]{.ix} produced by
> commodity relations assume decisive importance both for the objective
> evolution of society and for the attitudes that people adopt toward it, as it
> subjugates their [consciousness]{.ix} to the forms in which this reification
> finds expression .... As [labor]{.ix} is increasingly rationalized and
> mechanized, this subjugation is reinforced by the fact that people's activity
> becomes less and less active and more and more
> [contemplative]{.ix data-ix="contemplation"}."_
>
> —[Lukács]{.ix data-ix="Lukács, György"},
> _[History and Class Consciousness]{.ix data-ix="History and Class Consciousness (Lukàcs)"}_

### 35

The Spectacle's basic operation is the incorporation of all the _transient_,
[directly experienced]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"} activities of
human life into itself so as to regenerate
them as [commodities]{.ix} in frozen form. The spectacle is a process of the
_inversion_ of the values of daily life into purely
[abstract]{.ix data-ix="abstraction"} values.[
  "the inversion of the values of daily life into purely abstract values": The
  spectacle often presents these commodities in their negative, as products are
  typically advertised by their negative qualities, that which they are not: fat
  free, caffeine free, BPA-free, fair-trade (another way of saying it contains
  less exploitation.)
]{#fn35.1 .fn .fn-scroll}
In these abstract values we recognize our old enemy[
  "we recognize our old enemy": C.f. Marx, K., 1856. Full quotation "In the
  signs that bewilder the middle class, the aristocracy and the poor prophets of
  regression, we do recognise our brave friend, Robin Goodfellow…"
]{#fn35.2 .fn}
_the commodity_, which seems trivial and obvious at first, but which is full of
complexity and [metaphysical]{.ix data-ix="metaphysics"} subtleties.[
  "full of complexity and metaphysical subtleties.": C.f. Marx, K., Mandel, E.,
  Fowkes, B. & Fernbach, D. 1978 (Vol I, Ch. 1, Section 4). Full quotation: "A
  commodity appears at first glance to be something very trivial and obvious.
  Analysis reveals that it is in reality a very strange thing, abounding in
  metaphysical subtleties and theological abstrusities"
]{#fn35.3 .fn .fn-l}

### 36

The transformation of human life into commodities is the apex of [commodity
fetishism]{.ix}: a domination of society by "imperceptible as well as
[perceptible]{.ix data-ix="perception"} things",[
  "imperceptible as well as perceptible things": C.f. Marx, K., Mandel, E.,
  Fowkes, B. & Fernbach, D., 1978. Full quotation: "A commodity is therefore a
  mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labor
  appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that
  labor; because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own
  labor is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between
  themselves, but between the products of their labor. This is the reason why
  the products of labor become commodities, social things whose qualities are at
  the same time perceptible and imperceptible by the senses."
]{#fn36.1 .fn}
which is to say, the very objects created by the [labor]{.ix} of the [working
class]{.ix}. This results in a reality in which life is no longer [directly
experienced]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"}, but instead represented
by [images]{.ix} of experience. These images present themselves as the best
possible version of reality.

### 37

The spectacle _presents an image_ of [reality]{.ix data-ix="images, of reality"}
in which the [commodity]{.ix data-ix="commodities"} dominates all living
experience, this image is understood to be reality itself. The
development of this image, the world of the commodity, is presented plainly as
its rationale directly correlates with individuals _[alienation]{.ix}_[
  "the world of the commodity… directly correlates with individuals alienation":
  The spectacle produces alienation as its predominant product, and alienation
  is the underlying ideology of the spectacle (accepted as common sense by
  society.) As such, the spectacle need not hide its alienating character, and
  can instead _promote_ alienation since its underlying premise has already been
  accepted as truth.
]{#fn37.1 .fn}
from each other and from the collective products of their
[labor]{.ix data-ix="labor, alienation from"}.

### 38

The spectacle produces an increasing [quantity of
language]{.ix data-ix="language, quantity of"} that specifically describes the
commodities it promotes and the behaviors it encourages. The
resulting language gradually loses its ability to describe actual reality. This
stems from a system of production that shuns reality. What remains is a large
quantity of language describing its own corrupt production. A language
increasingly capable of describing quantity and unable to describe
[quality]{.ix data-ix="language, qualitative ability"}.[
  "A language increasingly capable of describing quantity and unable to describe
  quality": In effect, language is a shattering mirror, increasingly able to
  describe the quantity of its own shards, but with a diminished ability to
  reflect reality.
]{#fn38.1 .fn}

### 39

The increased quantity of language describing the spectacle lacks any
[qualitative aspects]{.ix data-ix="language, qualitative ability"},[
  "The increased quantity of language describing the spectacle lacks any
  qualitative aspects": The dynamic between mythical societies and quality
  versus ideologic societies and quantity is well established in Situationist
  texts, "The myth is based on quality, ideology on quantity" see Vaneigem,
  R., 2010. This is all to say, in the realm of ideology, culture tends to shed
  its content and embrace pure quantity; the less content the media has, the
  more it is repeated (e.g. Retweeted), the more it distracts people from their
  real problems‒a meme based society.
]{#fn39.1 .fn}
but it is subject to qualitative change. The contemporary
inability of the language to adequately describe the spectacle is itself
evidence of the _enormous development_ of the
[spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, development of"}. While this development
may not yet be evenly distributed across all localities, this change has
progressed to such an extent that it is verified by the existence of a
[globalized marketplace]{.ix data-ix="global market"}.

### 40

The _[unconscious]{.ix data-ix="unconsciousness"} history_ of human society is
the [history]{.ix} of the development of production systems. This history has
created the material conditions of society in the pursuit of [survival]{.ix}[
  "the pursuit of survival/obfuscated version of survival": The Situationists
  made sharp distinctions between mere "survival" and a life of participation
  and direct experience. For more on this distinction see Vaneigem, R., 2010.
]{#fn40.1 .fn};
it has become the [economic]{.ix data-ix="economics"} basis of all human
activity, and expands these conditions. The expansion of these conditions relies
on the improvement of the underlying economic basis these developments rely on,
thus creating a surplus of survival. When [commodity]{.ix data-ix="commodities"}
exchange is limited
to exchange between individuals, it will remain for a long time simply
individual small-scale artisanal trade. The ends are still "the production of a
craft" in which its quantitative aspect was limited and largely hidden. When
trade conditions develop to include corporate and state size trades and the
[accumulation of capital]{.ix data-ix="capital, accumulation"}—the entire
economy switches to a process of pure quantitative development. This transforms
craft into [commodity]{.ix}, and craftsmanship into _wage labor_ as all things
produced by craft will become banalized as utility value demands equality and
exchangeability across all commodities produced. The producer is freed from the
natural pressure that demanded the struggle of survival, but they are in no way
liberated from their liberator. The drive for survival is replaced with a drive
for labor that transforms the world of survival into a world of economics. It is
at this juncture where labor is alienated from craft. It is in this falsified
pseudo-state within which human labor has become
[alienated]{.ix data-ix="alienation"}, all human activity must remain forever
_in the service_ of the production of banal commodities that
contribute to the expansion of this system of production. The abundance of these
commodities, and the relationships of the individuals who both produce and
consume them amounts to nothing more than a _developed form of survival_.[
  "nothing more than a developed form of survival": The original French is
  <q lang="fr">ne peut être plus que la survie augmentée</q> or "can be no more
  than augmented survival", which is to say, a form of survival not in service
  towards the continuation of the experience of life, but the continuation of
  labor in service to the dominant mode of production.
]{#fn40.2 .fn}

### 41

The domination of the [commodity]{.ix data-ix="commodities"}, and the hidden way
the world of [economics]{.ix} became the material basis of social life remained
misunderstood and unnoticed because it seemed so familiar.[
  "unnoticed because it seemed so familiar": C.f. Hegel, G., 2013 (January 31).
  Full quotation is "What is 'familiarly known' is not properly known, just for
  the reason that it is 'familiar'."
]{#fn41.1 .fn}
In societies where commodities are scarce, money is the dominating force that
acts as an emissary representing the voice of the unknown power.[
  "the voice of the unknown power": A concrete example is how money is used as
  leverage over developing nations, in the form of IMF loans, to enact socially
  conservative fiscal policies. These are essentially "unknown powers", or more
  literally, foreign power exerted over local populations.
]{#fn41.2 .fn}
It was with the [industrial revolution]{.ix}, and the
[fordist]{.ix data-ix="fordism"} mode of production that increased the
[division of labor]{.ix} and began production for the [global market]{.ix} that
the commodity became the _colonizing_ principle of social life. It was at this
moment that the [political economy]{.ix} established itself as the dominant
[science]{.ix} and the science of domination.

### 42

The [spectacle]{.ix} is the form society takes when the commodity
[colonizes]{.ix data-ix="colonization"} _all_ of social life. The total
commodification of social life is not only visible, we no longer see anything
else as all of reality is [mediated]{.ix data-ix="mediation"} by our
relationship to [commodities]{.ix}. Contemporary economic production extends its
dictatorship of the commodity both broadly and intensively. In the least
industrialized places, [imperialism]{.ix} imposed by advanced societies forces
the production of a few "star commodities" upon the colonized. In advanced
societies, the [alienated]{.ix data-ix="alienation"} production of abstract
commodities becomes secondary to commodity consumption. With the arrival of the
"Information Revolution", alienated consumption has become as much a duty for
the working class as alienated production. The sum total of industrial
production and consumer consumption is then _sold as a complete commodity_,[
  "complete commodity": I interpret this idea as the continual reproduction of
  the spectacle as the total and predominant product of all spectacular labor.
  According to Russell "the historical specificity of the spectacle unfolding
  in accordance with the development of the autonomy of the commodity can
  thereby be witnessed through a greater absorption of labour into the
  circulation sphere, an effort devoted strictly to the realization of surplus
  value, rather than to its creation." See Russell, E., 2021 (Pp. 203).
]{#fn42.1 .fn}
whose production must continue at all costs—the reproduction of the
spectacle. In order to accomplish this reproduction, the spectacle must be
fragmented, reimagined, and regurgitated[
  "regurgitated": A similar and more relevant term today would be "retweeted".
]{#fn42.2 .fn}
in slightly new form for consumption by individuals who are completely alienated
from its production. To serve the purpose of this alienation, the science of the
[division of labor]{.ix} (i.e. [specialization]{.ix}) further breaks down the
reproduction of the spectacle into fields such as [sociology]{.ix},
psychotechnology, [cybernetics]{.ix}, and even [semiology]{.ix}; which oversee
the operation of this process.

### 43

In the primitive phase of capitalism, the [political economy]{.ix} only
considers the labor-output of the _worker_, who only needs to be allocated the
minimum amount to [sustain]{.ix data-ix="living wages"} his labor contributions,
without considering his [leisure]{.ix} or humanity.[
  "the political economy only considers the labor-output… without considering
  his leisure or humanity": C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1988. Full quotation:
  "political economy regards the proletarian… as nothing more than a worker. It
  can therefore advance the proposition that, like a horse, he must receive just
  enough to enable him to work. It does not consider him when he is not working,
  as a human being."
]{#fn43.1 .fn}
The [ruling class]{.ix} is forced to reconsider this once the production of
commodities reaches an abundance accessible to the general population. At this
point, the ruling class must collaborate with the working class, the worker is
no longer contempted for a lack of labor, but treated with politeness for being
a consumer. In this way, the _commodity takes on a humane_ approach, attending
to the workers "leisure and humanity" for the simple reason that the _[political
economy]{.ix}_ must expand from the realm of production to the realm of
consumption.  Thus the totality of human existence falls under the regime of the
"total denial of man".[
  "total denial of man": C.f. Marx, K. & Engels, F., 1988. Full quotation:
  "Thus, although political economy, whose principle is labor, appears to
  recognize man, it is in fact nothing more than the denial of man carried to
  its logical conclusion."
]{#fn43.2 .fn}

### 44

The [spectacle]{.ix} gradually leads individuals to identify personal
satisfaction with [survival]{.ix} itself. This transforms satisfaction into a
commodity, and transitively, survival itself becomes a commodity. Survival must
always increase, thus creating a continuation _of [lack]{.ix}_. There must never
be enough [satisfaction]{.ix}, as [satisfaction]{.ix} begets additional lack.
The accumulation of satisfaction becomes a gilded poverty, but it cannot
transcend it.

### 45

The technical practice of [automation]{.ix} is the vanguard of the economy.
Automation of [labor]{.ix} creates a contradiction in the development of
society: the technical apparatus which eliminates manual labor must
simultaneously preserve
_[labor as a commodity]{.ix data-ix="labor, as commodity"}_. If society doesn't
want the time involved in manual labor to decrease due to automation, then new
labor must be created. Those jobs eliminated by automation will move a reserve
army of the unemployed into "[services]{.ix}" and tertiary sectors of the
economy. This reserve army acts as the supply lines for the troops deployed to
the production and consumption of the latest commodities at a time when
increasingly excessive [advertising]{.ix} campaigns are necessary to convince
individuals to buy increasingly [unnecessary
commodities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"}.[
  "increasingly unnecessary commodities": These are the pseudo-necessities of
  daily survival (E.g. an iPhone and a Netflix subscription).
]{#fn45.1 .fn}

### 46

[Exchange value]{.ix data-ix="value, exchange"} is contingent upon, but exists
merely as a proxy for a commodities [use value]{.ix data-ix="value, use"}.
Exchange value won its victory over use value, utilizing the weaponization of
[capital]{.ix} to create the preconditions necessary to become an autonomous
[power]{.ix} beyond use value. Exchange value has taken precedence over use
value, monopolizing all aspects of human [satisfaction]{.ix}, thus _controlling a
commodities use_. The process of exchange tightly binds itself to every possible
use, subjugating use to a secondary concern to exchange. Thus, exchange value
becomes the _[condottiere]{.ix}_[
  "condottiere": The Condottiere were the mercenary leaders fighting for the
  wealthy landlords during Renaissance Italy who often ended up taking over the
  states they were fighting for.
]{#fn46.1 .fn}
of use value, waging war for predominance in the
[ideology]{.ix data-ix="ideology, of the market"} of the market, for its own
sake.

### 47

The _use value_ of [commodities]{.ix} gradually declines as the spectacle
continually generates new [pseudo-necessities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"}.
This creates a new form of poverty alongside the older [poverty]{.ix}: a poverty
of [dispossession]{.ix} from spectacular pseudo-necessities. As such, [wage
workers]{.ix data-ix="working class"} are continually going after an endless
attainment of money as it loses value; a sisyphean task indeed. The worker
labors under the false belief that they must attain more wealth or die, when
[survival]{.ix} itself is not actually in danger.[
  "survival itself is not actually in danger": See note to thesis 40 on ["the
  pursuit of survival"](#fn40.1).
]{#fn47.1 .fn}
This is a sort of blackmail in which the worker only achieves an illusory
[wealth]{.ix}, in the form of increased commodity consumption but no real
increase to the quality of their [directly lived experience]{.ix}. The
blackmailed are in fear of an [illusion]{.ix data-ix="illusions"}, and the
commodity is the
[materialized]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, materialized"} illusion as made manifest
by the spectacle.

### 48

[Exchange value]{.ix data-ix="value, exchange"} was previously understood as
derived from [use value]{.ix data-ix="value, use"}. Now, however, within the
inverted reality of the
spectacle, use value must be explicitly (and with great pretension)
[advertised]{.ix data-ix="advertising"}, as the actual use value of the
commodity has been diminished as its connection to [directly lived
reality]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"} has been gradually eroded. The
commodities relevance has been made obsolete by the continual development of the
market [economy]{.ix}. Thus, the [pseudo-necessity]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"}
of these commodities require [pseudo-justifications]{.ix}.

### 49

The [spectacle]{.ix} is the complement of [money]{.ix}. Money represents the
equivalent exchange of individual goods whose use value cannot be directly
compared. The spectacle is the contemporary development transcending the
equivalent exchange of individual goods towards a representation of the totality
of the commodity market as the equivalent of what the whole of society can be
and do. The first abstraction—money, useful [commodities]{.ix} are represented
for exchange, yields to the next layer of abstraction—the spectacle, in which
money is _merely gazed upon_, because all use value has
already been exchanged for the first abstraction. Thus, the spectacle is not
only an abstraction of _pseudo-use_ value, but an abstraction of the totality of
the system of production of [pseudo-necessities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"}.[
  "Thus, the spectacle… production of pseudo-necessities": I've significantly
  reworded the original French in hopes of making Debords argument more clear.
  Original French is <q lang="fr">Le spectacle n'est pas seulement le serviteur
  du pseudo-usage, il est déjà en lui-même le pseudo-usage de la vie.</q> or as
  translated by Nicholson-Smith "The spectacle is not just the servant of
  pseudo­-use­—it is already, in itself, the pseudo­-use of life." This is to
  say, the consumer is at first separated from their labor through the
  dissatisfied consumption of those pseudo-needs generated by the spectacle.
  Second, the consumer is passively separated from the spectacle by their
  passive gaze upon the spectacle which no longer needs their labor, nor which
  creates products they need, yet produces false necessities they cannot afford.
]{#fn49.1 .fn .fn-l}

### 50

When society reaches the level of generalized _economic_ abundance, the result
of all social labor becomes visible, transforming [directly lived
reality]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"} into the spectacle that is the
product of this society's system of production. [Capital]{.ix data-ix="capital"}
is no longer the invisible authority directing the system of production; as
capital accumulates, it spreads to the ends of the earth in the form of
commodities.[
  "[capital] spreads to the ends of the earth in the form of commodities.":
  Capital, the once secret fuel of the system of production, now becomes an
  outward symbol for this system. With the hegemony of globalization, it is now
  possible to travel anywhere in the world and buy products that are the same
  everywhere, each literally printed with the name of the company that created
  it, a dedication to the owners of capital.
]{#fn50.1 .fn}
The entirety of society becomes a portrait of the capital who is its patron.

### 51

The [financialization]{.ix} of the economy[
  "financialization of the economy": The original French is <q lang="fr">La
  victoire de l'économie autonome…</q> which is "The victory of the autonomous
  economy…" I've changed this text to refer to the hegemony of exchange value
  over use value, and how that has produced a self-perpetuating (autonomous)
  power.
]{#fn51.1 .fn}
emerged victorious as an [autonomous power]{.ix data-ix="autonomous, power"}
for its own sake,
simultaneously underwriting its own demise. The forces unleashed by the
autonomous power of the financial [economy]{.ix} undermine the efforts of
ancient societies that put the _material needs_ of humans (e.g. food, clothing,
shelter) at the center of its economy. These needs are replaced by boundless
financial economic [growth]{.ix data-ix="infinite growth"} itself, and society
demands the necessity of infinite growth. The [satisfaction]{.ix} of basic human
needs is therefore replaced with the increasing growth of the generation of new
[pseudo-needs]{.ix}, and the abstract pseudo-need for this economic arrangement
to continue indefinitely.  Society then refocuses its basis to the maintenance
and growth of these pseudo-needs at the expense of authentic needs, a result of
a _social [unconsciousness]{.ix}_ dependent upon the economy of pseudo-needs.
This is called the "[autonomous economy]{.ix data-ix="economy, autonomous"}"—the
economy which has shifted
from the satisfaction of basic social needs to the generation of pseudo-needs
for its own sake. "Whatever is conscious wears out.[
  "Whatever is conscious wears out…": Quote not found, but attributed to Sigmund
  Freud (1856-1939), the founder of psychoanalysis.
]{#fn51.2 .fn}
What is unconscious remains unalterable. But once it is freed, does it not fall
to ruin in its turn?"

### 52

At the moment society discovers that it depends on the
[autonomous economy]{.ix data-ix="economy, autonomous"}, the [economy]{.ix}
depends on society.[
  "the economy depends on society": Society is conscious that its way of life
  depends on the consumption of pseudo-needs lest it collapse.
]{#fn52.1 .fn}
This formerly [secret power]{.ix data-ix="power, secret"}, which has developed
to such an extent that it became visible and autonomous, has lost its power.[
  "[secret power] has lost its power.": At this point, an autonomous economy is
  necessary in that it has become sovereign, while simultaneously fragile with
  its dependence upon society to continually consume the pseudo-needs it 
  continues to generate, a parasitic symbiosis. Once this symbiosis is realized,
  society must internalize the autonomous economy as an intrinsic part of
  itself, not something external to itself, i.e. the economy is society, and
  society is the economy.
]{#fn52.2 .fn .fn-l}
The economic [_Id_]{.ix data-ix="Ego and the Id, The (Freud)"} must be replaced
by the _I_.[
  "The economic Id must be replaced by the I.": An allusion to _The Ego and the
  Id_, See Freud, S. & Strachey, J., 1989. Debord uses détournement with his
  replacement of Ego with "I", perhaps interpreted as an allusion to the
  emergence of the individual in late-capitalism. The advent of the individual
  as the locus of self-determination, responsibility, and personal choice is a
  result of individuation: a social life determined less by geography,
  ethnicity, race, blood, kin, rank, and religion, and instead focusing on the
  emergence of the human as _individual consumer_ separated from traditional
  norms, meaning, and rules. This life becomes a reality of self-choice to be
  discovered within the context of the global economy rather than a received
  destiny inherited at birth. To service this social shift, there must be an
  equal economic shift that organizes production around the individual, offering
  products and services customized and distributed to meet individualized wants
  and (pseudo-)needs. For more on this topic see Zuboff, S. & Maxmin, J., 2002.
]{#fn52.3 .fn}
The individual, the subject of the [autonomous economy]{.ix data-ix="economy,
autonomous"} can only emerge
from the society that has organized itself for the production of the
individualized [pseudo-necessities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"} of the
individual—the general class struggle of each individual to create a
self-determined reality against an economy prepared to create reality for its
own sake. The existence of the autonomous economy is contingent upon the results
of this struggle, the manifestation of which is the product and producer (i.e.
the individual vs economic production) creating the economic and material basis
of [history]{.ix}.

### 53

Under the struggle of [capitalism]{.ix}, the worker seeks to abolish all classes
and control the [means of production]{.ix data-ix="production, means of"}, the
consumer desires to understand
the nature of their desire for [pseudo-necessities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"},
while desiring the need to be [conscious]{.ix data-ix="consciousness"} of this
[desire]{.ix}; which is to say, a consumer-worker in possession of complete
control over their investments of [time]{.ix} into both [consumption]{.ix} and
[production]{.ix}. The _opposite_ of this is the society of the spectacle, in
which the commodity [contemplates]{.ix data-ix="contemplation"} itself in a
reality of its own making.[
  "the commodity contemplates itself in a reality of its own making": C.f. Marx,
  K. & Engels, F., 1988. "He contemplates himself in a world that he himself has
  created." In the spectacle, the product (i.e. the commodity) exists
  for its own sake, external to any human desire, or even society itself,
  organizing reality in order to reproduce itself. This is what Debord means
  with the term the "[autonomous economy]{.ix data-ix="economy, autonomous"}."
]{#fn53.1 .fn}

:::::
