::::: {.chapter}

## <span class="ch-roman">III.</span> Unity & Division within Appearances {title="Unity & Division Within Appearances"}

> _"An intense new polemic is unfolding on the
> [philosophical]{.ix data-ix="philosophy"} front in this country, focusing on
> the concepts 'one divides into two' and 'two fuse into one'. This debate is a
> struggle between those who are for and those who are against the materialist
> dialectic, a struggle between two conceptions of the world: the
> [proletarian]{.ix data-ix="proletariat"} conception and the bourgeois
> conception. Those who maintain that 'one divides into two' is the fundamental
> law of things are on the side of the materialist [dialectic]{.ix}; those who
> maintain that the fundamental law of things is that 'two fuse into one' are
> against the [materialist dialectic]{.ix data-ix="dialectical materialism"}.
> The two sides have drawn a clear line of demarcation between them, and their
> arguments are diametrically opposed. This polemic is a reflection, on the
> [ideological]{.ix data-ix="ideology"} level, of the acute and complex [class
> struggle]{.ix data-ix="class struggle"} taking place in [China]{.ix} and in
> the world."_
>
> —_[Red Flag]{.ix data-ix="Red Flag (magazine)"}_[
  The Red Flag (红旗) was a theoretical political journal published by the
  Chinese Communist Party, published from 1958 until 1988.
]{#fniii.0 .fn} (Beijing), September 21, 1964

### 54

The [spectacle]{.ix} is simultaneously perceived as united and divided, it
builds unity upon disjunction.[
  "unity upon disjunction": For example, Americans are unified around the
  concept of a two-party system, whereby Democrats and Republicans only exist in
  order to be opposed to one another. Similarly, when the individual sees wealth
  inequality, they are both disgusted and yet subsumed by the fact that the
  spectacle and society itself would cease to function without it. The spectacle
  is "A unifying force that separates", or "to put it in terms of Hegel's
  speculative, the identity of identity and non-identity." (Russell, E. 2021 Pp.
  12, 67), which is to say, a force that separates people in order to create
  separate separating identities.
]{#fn54.1 .fn .fn-scroll .fn-scroll-lg}
The unity of each is contingent upon [violent]{.ix data-ix="violence"} divisions
against the other. When this [contradiction]{.ix} is portrayed by the spectacle,
its meaning is reversed: the divisions it portrays are unitary, while the unity
it presents is divided.

### 55

The [power struggle]{.ix data-ix="power, struggle for"} between nations
internationally, political groups, and parties within each nation[
  "parties within each nation": These parties differ only in the style of the
  theatrics they present to a willing audience of spectators. There is no
  distinction between parties when it comes to an alternative to the spectacle.
]{#fn55.1 .fn}
all present themselves as legitimate contestants opposed to one another as the
ones better equipped to manage society—but in fact are united in the
representation and maintenance of the spectacle. In practice they only offer the
continuation of the [status quo]{.ix}.

### 56[This thesis provides a foundational definition of contemporary identity politics.]{#fn56.1 .fn}{#t56 data-bookmark-label="56"}

The falsified struggle between power groups[
  "The struggle between power groups…": Nominally a struggle akin to Coke vs
  Pepsi, while both offering mere sugar water.
]{#fn56.2 .fn .fn-l}
(despite being theatrical), is real in that the struggle [defines their
identities]{.ix data-ix="identity; identity politics"} in relation to the
spectacular society. The struggle is to define the dominant characteristics as
well as the form and boundaries of these characteristics[
  "form and boundaries of these characteristics…": As political groups, each
  group attempts to hold a monopoly on particular political opinions, e.g.
  'we're the party of free public healthcare'. These typically take the form: we
  believe in 'x', we are against 'y', we do not 'z', we are 'a'.
]{#fn56.3 .fn}
in order to construct a cohesive social identity that stands
apart from other identities. The difference between power groups is determined
by their level of [economic development]{.ix} or the contradictory interests of
the classes that attempt to construct their social identities within these
groups.  The definition of these priorities are decided by the ruling group, to
the detriment of, and in opposition to the [minority]{.ix data-ix="minorities"}.
This impacts individuals within the nation as well as those in [colonized
regions]{.ix data-ix="colonization"} inside the sphere of influence of the
nation. The spectacle presents these differences as absolutely distinct forms
of social organization, but in fact they are all different styles of
localized [capitalism]{.ix}[
  "different styles of localized capitalism.": E.g. social-democratic capitalism as in
  Europe, authoritarian capitalism as in China and Singapore, even Russia is a
  form of bureaucratic state-controlled totalitarian capitalism.
]{#fn56.4 .fn}
that contribute to the transformation of the world into a globalized field of
spectacular capitalism.

### 57

Where the economic form of the spectacle hasn't yet dominated undeveloped
[colonized]{.ix data-ix="colonization"} countries, they are instead dominated by
its theatrical aspects in [media]{.ix}, and the desire for
[pseudo-necessities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"}: _as the society of the
spectacle_. Cultural developments influence the indigenous [ruling
classes]{.ix data-ix="ruling class"} and limit their agendas. These cultural
dominations, just like the pseudo-necessities that never
[satisfy]{.ix data-ix="satisfaction"}, also provide false models of
revolutionary behavior to local dissidents. At the national level, the spectacle
presents local and national [specializations]{.ix data-ix="specialization"},[
  "local and national specializations": E.g. the US has become the worldwide
  police & surveillance force, China the worldwide mass-manufacturer, and India
  a supplier of low-cost knowledge workers.
]{#fn57.1 .fn}
but when looking from a global scale we see a _global division of spectacular
[labor]{.ix data-ix="division of labor"}_.

### 58

The division of spectacular labor primarily reinforces the dominance of the
spectacle as a whole worldwide system, but it primarily focuses on the
development of its most advanced economic sectors. [As the spectacle is founded
upon an economy of abundance, the fruits of that economy tend to dominate the
spectacular market within its sphere of influence]{#fruits}[
  "the fruits of that economy": The original French is phrased beautifully:
  <q lang="fr">les fruits qui tendent finalement à dominer le marché
  spectaculaire.</q> or "the fruits eventually tend to dominate the spectacular
  market".
]{#fn58.1 .fn},
despite any local authoritarian [police]{.ix} protections or
[ideologies]{.ix data-ix="ideology"} that grant the locality the appearance of
independence.

### 59

As the [spectacle]{.ix} increasingly produces new products to maintain our
[attention]{.ix}, it simultaneously increases the
_[banalization]{.ix data-ix="banality"}_ of life, as the limitless choice of
equivalent [pseudo-necessities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"} becomes meaningless
when all of these objects fail to [satisfy]{.ix data-ix="satisfaction"} actual
necessity. The relics of the [class struggle]{.ix} that persist to the present
day are religion and family.[
  "The relics of the class struggle… family": The family continues to be the
  primary mechanism of transferral of class status, wealth, and power from one
  generation to the next.
]{#fn59.1 .fn}
These two institutions continue to tout the value of moral-oppression and
[conservatism]{.ix} as the solution to the spectacular excesses of our
contemporary period. The result of economic [abundance]{.ix} is both an
apathetic smugness[
  "apathetic smugness": This smugness comes in a few varieties: complacent
  acceptance e.g. "lets just face the facts, we can't change anything!" or
  delusional technocratic reformism: "we can reform capitalism by increasing
  taxation and providing universal basic income."
]{#fn59.2 .fn .fn-l}
and a new spectacular [rebellion]{.ix}[
  "spectacular rebellion": Recently emergent examples of this type of rebellion
  take the form of religious fundamentalism, terrorism, cultural resistance,
  aimless protest, and culture jamming.
]{#fn59.3 .fn}
that presents an image of opposition, but cannot exist without the spectacle it
opposes. This is because dissatisfaction has
become a [commodity]{.ix data-ix="commodities"} recreated by the spectacle, as
dissatisfaction is the raw material for spectacular society.

### 60

The [celebrity]{.ix} is a relatable living representative of the spectacle, each
offering the individual a possible role for the spectacles portrayal of an
_[actually lived life]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"}_. The individual
compensates for a life of narrow [specialization]{.ix} in work and shallow
[participation]{.ix} in life by identifying with the celebrities they perceive
as living an actually lived life—a life of complete [participation]{.ix} that is
both broad and deep. This is an identification with mere appearances. These
celebrities act out various styles of living that a single individual could
never live, in a _totally free manner_. The celebrity embodies
the social labor made possible by individual
[specialists]{.ix data-ix="specialization"}, but that the specialist can never
realize themselves; namely the exercise of _[power]{.ix}_, the enjoyment of
[leisure]{.ix}, _taking vacations_, making life-changing decisions, and the
consumption of a wide variety of products and services. The celebrity is able to
see and do what the individual is not—participate in both the beginning and end[
  "participate in both the beginning and end…": The celebrity represents the
  idealized form of life under the spectacle: a life in which the individual
  needs not make decisions that may foreclose other paths through life; but can
  live every life possible with full participation in all aspects of life. This
  is, of course, an image of life presented _as_ life. In witnessing the ideal
  form of living as performed by a celebrity, the individual can themselves feel
  they have lived those lives.
]{#fn60.1 .fn}
of the system of production. In the case of the exercise of power, the national
government assumes the form of a celebrity personified, in the case of the
celebrity consumption of leisure, travel, and products that present the star
with the influential power over the experience of life. Ultimately, as these
[pseudo-lives]{.ix} are not representative of the totality of human lives, they
offer no actual choice between real lives.

### 61

The [celebrity]{.ix} is the opposite of the individual; in assuming the role of
the celebrity, they must accept the public identifying with them and renouncing
their own unique identities. The celebrity is as much an enemy of their own
individuality as to the individuality of others. Each celebrity represents an
aspect of identity to be consumed by the public. In doing so, each of their
unique characteristics is up for sale and is no longer their own. With each
performance, the celebrity outwardly expresses different modes of living and
unique personalities, demonstrating [happiness]{.ix} across the entire realm of
consumable lifestyles. These stars, across multiple roles, possess a full range
of admirable human characteristics, the
[contradictory]{.ix data-ix="contradiction"} differences between these roles is
cancelled out by the presentation of excellence in each one.
[Khrushchev]{.ix data-ix="Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeyevich"}[
  Khrushchev: Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev (Ники́та Серге́евич Хрущёв). In July
  1943 near Kursk, the largest tank battle in history pitted roughly four
  thousand Soviet tanks against roughly three thousand German tanks. Khrushchev
  claims to have told Stalin (over his commanding officer) "Our defensive
  positions are solid,... we'll be able to hold our ground." See Taubman, W.,
  2003. He later became the Chairman of the Council of Ministers (or premier) of
  the Soviet Union during the Cold War. After Stalin's death, he took power and
  attempted to end the purges and enact more liberal civil policies.
]{#fn61.1 .fn .fn-l}
had to be retroactively promoted to general in order to be given credit for the
battle of [Kursk]{.ix}, twenty years later. [John F.
Kennedy]{.ix data-ix="Kennedy, John F."}, the great orator, survived
himself when his speech writer [Theodore
Sorenson]{.ix data-ix="Sorenson, Theodore"} penned his own funeral oration
in the same style that created the dead man's public persona. The most admirable
celebrities who personify the spectacle are those who are known for being
[fake]{.ix data-ix="fakeness"}: they become [famous]{.ix data-ix="fame"} by
stooping below anything an acceptable individual would do[
  "they become famous by stooping below anything an acceptable individual
  would do": C.f. Hegel, G., Hoffmeister, J., Nisbet, H. & Forbes, D., 1975.
  Full quotation is "Thus, the great individuals of history can only be
  understood within their own context; and they are admirable simply because
  they have made themselves the instruments of substantial spirit." Ex-Prime
  Minister of Italy Silvio Berlusconi and ex-US President Donald J. Trump are
  perfect examples of the celebrity politician who played themselves while in
  office.
]{#fn61.2 .fn}—and everyone knows it.

### 62

The spectacle offers an abundance of choice, expressed as loyalties to one side
of a [false dichotomy]{.ix}.[
  "loyalty to false dichotomies…": e.g. Democrats vs. Republicans, Coke vs.
  Pepsi; which is to say, alternatives which aren't significantly different.
]{#fn62.1 .fn}
These loyalties are aligned between competing & complementary spectacles or the
juxtaposition of rules within the spectacle. These false dichotomies develop
into struggles between opposing teams who claim fierce allegiance to what are
otherwise trivial differences. This resurrects long-dormant [racism]{.ix} and
[regionalism]{.ix}, creating [irrational]{.ix data-ix="irrationality"} and
unnecessary ontological superiorities. All this sets the stage for trivial
confrontations—[sporting]{.ix data-ix="sports"} events,
[theatrical]{.ix data-ix="theater"} [elections]{.ix}, and the like. The presence
of abundundant consumption pits the adults against the youth, but "real adults",
those people who are responsible for the destiny of their own lives—are in fact
nowhere to be found. Furthermore, it is not the youth that makes change, but the
spectacle.[
  "it is not the youth that makes change, but the spectacle.": The difference
  and confrontation between adult and youth culture is merely the difference
  between the commodities they consume, and their modes of consumption. Baby
  Boomers may tend to consume the spectacular media via television, while
  Millennials consumed the spectacular media by an ever-changing sequence of
  social media apps: MySpace, Facebook, Instagram, SnapChat, TicTok, etc. They
  both consume the spectacular media.
]{#fn62.2 .fn}
It is the new _commodities_ of the spectacle which are young and changing. At
its core, the [commodities]{.ix} are what are directly confronting and replacing
one another.

### 63

Beneath the abundance of [false dichotomies]{.ix data-ix="false dichotomy"}
lies a _unity of [poverty]{.ix}_, this is the struggle for dominance of trivial
differences in form, maintained within the continuation of [alienation]{.ix}. In
making either choice, individuals become united in opposition to each
other—engaged in a pointless struggle,[
  "pointless struggle": Revealing this truth will present the triviality of the
  false opposition—revealing the perception of total agency and free will as a
  superficial free will, one limited to decisions that reinforce the spectacle.
  Behind every choice we perceive to be based upon our free will and responsible
  choice, is a series of prior decisions based on experiences occurring in the
  spectacular society which shapes these experiences and choices in ways that
  are hidden to us. On both sides of spectacular opposition, the spectacle is
  the unity both sides share in their spectacular struggle against each other, a
  struggle that defines their identities (in part).
]{#fn63.1 .fn .fn-scroll .fn-scroll-lg}
where only the spectacle benefits from the continual regeneration of this false
opposition while real contradictions are repressed. The spectacle, at its most
abstract level, presents itself in one of two possible forms: the
_[concentrated]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, concentrated"}_ form or the
_[diffuse]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, diffuse"}_ form.[
  "the concentrated form or the diffuse form": Debord has since updated his
  analysis: "In 1967 I distinguished two rival and successive forms of
  spectacular power, the concentrated and the diffuse… The former, presenting an
  ideology concentrated around a dictatorial personality, had accompanied the
  Nazi and Stalinist totalitarian counterrevolutions. The latter, inciting
  wage-earners to apply their freedom of choice to the vast range of new
  commodities now on offer, had represented the Americanisation of the world…
  Since then a third form has been established, through the rational combination
  of these two, and on the basis of a general victory of the form that had shown
  itself stronger: the diffuse. This is the
  _[integrated spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, integrated"}_, which has since
  tended to impose itself globally." See Debord, G. & Imrie, M., 1998.
]{#fn63.2 .fn .fn-l}
One form comes to the forefront depending on the needs of the particular stage
of [poverty]{.ix} it needs to maintain and regenerate. In either form, it
results in the happy harmony around false dichotomies and spectacular
oppositions that generates desolation and horror at the calm center of misery.[
  "happy harmony… calm center of misery": A detournément from Moby Dick, full
  quote is "And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternations
  and affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freely and
  fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yea, serenely revelled in
  dalliance and delight. But even so, amid the tornadoed Atlantic of my being,
  do I myself still for ever centrally disport in mute calm; and while ponderous
  planets of unwaning woe revolve round me, deep down and deep inland there I
  still bathe me in eternal mildness of joy." See Melville, H., 1991 (Ch. 87).
]{#fn63.3 .fn .fn-r}

### 64

The [concentrated spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, concentrated"} is primarily
associated with [bureaucratic
capitalism]{.ix data-ix="capitalism, bureaucratic"}, but is also the primary
form used by both undeveloped economies or advanced economies to reinforce state
power during moments of crisis.[
  "bureaucratic capitalism… during moments of crisis": The bureaucratic
  capitalist states use a centralized state power dictated by a supreme leader,
  or a central party with absolute power; for example, the former socialist
  USSR, contemporary China, and North Korea. In Western "neoliberal" or "free
  market" capitalism, absolute powers are given to the ruling class during
  moments of crisis such as natural disasters, popular protests, pandemics, and
  terrorist attacks. This approach to emergency powers was named "Shock
  Doctrine" by Naomi Klein in a book with the same title that describes the use
  of crisis to push through policies that grant additional powers to the state
  that wouldn't have been possible otherwise, see: Klein, N., 2007. Although
  Western capitalism has also become increasingly bureaucratized, when Debord
  uses the terms "the bureaucracy," "bureaucratic capitalism," "bureaucratic
  class," etc., he is referring to the "Communist" party's evolution into a new
  type of totalitarian bureaucratic ruling class. See also theses
  [103](#ref103.0) to [113](#ref113.0).
]{#fn64.1 .fn .fn-l}
Bureaucratic ownership, which is to say, the ownership of the [economy]{.ix} by
the bureaucratic class is also concentrated, in that any individual bureaucrat
maintains ownership only as a member of the bureaucratic community. Commodity
production, while less developed under bureaucratic capitalism, takes on a
concentrated form: the total control of social [labor]{.ix}. What it controls in
labor it sells back as exclusive access to the basic means of [survival]{.ix}.
As such, the dictatorship of bureaucratic economy cannot leave the exploited
classes any margin of choice, all consumption is carefully chosen by
bureaucratic capitalism because it has to make all choices itself and
independently of demand, whether regarding food, music, or anything else. This
amounts to a declaration of war against any independent choice outside of
itself. Whatever is produced must also be consumed, and nothing outside this
system officially exists. The masses cannot have any margin of choice, because
choice ultimately leads to the choice to destroy bureaucratic capitalism itself.
This dictatorship enforces itself with the exclusive control of the monopoly on
[violence]{.ix}. The concentrated spectacle imposes an image of the good which
encompasses everything that officially exists, and typically reflects back upon
the work of a single individual, who is the guarantor of its
[totalitarian]{.ix data-ix="totalitarianism"} cohesion. Everyone must magically
identify with this star individual or they will disappear. This individual is
the master of his non-consumption, the heroic image that explains and justifies
the absolute [exploitation]{.ix} that is in fact primitive accumulation
accelerated by official [terrorism]{.ix}. If every Chinese must learn
[Mao]{.ix data-ix="Mao, Zedong"}, and thus have to be Mao, it is because he or
she has _nothing else to be_. Wherever the concentrated spectacle dominates, the
[police]{.ix} also dominate.

### 65

The [diffuse spectacle]{.ix data-ix="spectacle, diffuse"} is primarily
associated with a society producing an abundance of [commodities]{.ix}, one
pursuing the fulfillment of capitalism—the production of commodities for
the sake of increasing production, and the need for constant economic
[growth]{.ix}. The spectacle is its self-congratulatory mouthpiece. The star
commodities argue with each other in contradictory ways, promoting conflicting
social policies but allowing individuals to identify with them accordingly. The
[automobile]{.ix} achieves more efficient travel and empowers individuals to be
autonomous, while destroying the [environment]{.ix} and the organic feel of
older cities that operate on a human-scale. This creates a tension between the
[desire]{.ix} for organic-feeling old [cities]{.ix} and the [tourism]{.ix} they
attract at the expense of vehicle ownership. These tensions create a gap of
satisfaction, where the consumer is _unable to satisfy the whole_ of what
society has to offer due to [contradictions]{.ix data-ix="contradiction"}
between its parts. Due to this contradiction, the whole is absent at every
aspect of society.

### 66[Each commodity independently seeks to create an optimized reality where it is the driving force for change within society, adjusting reality according to the logic of itself. For example, the automobile restructured the American city from a dense assemblage of buildings seen in Boston and New York towards the exurban expanse across large tracts of land requiring the highway system and buildings set-back from the road with large parking lots which established the design for cities like Los Angeles or Las Vegas. According to the logic of the car, the world must become either a highway or a parking lot.]{#fn66.0 .fn}{#t66 data-bookmark-label="66"}

Contradictory [commodities]{.ix} struggle for themselves, and cannot acknowledge
others. Each seeks to become predominant as if it existed alone. The spectacle
is the heroic poem of this struggle, one in which the fall of [Troy]{.ix}[
  "the fall of Troy…": An allusion to Homer's _Iliad_.
]{#fn66.1 .fn .fn-l}
would not bring about its conclusion. The spectacle doesn't sing of men and 
their [wars]{.ix data-ix="war"},[
  "The spectacle doesn't sing of men and their wars…": C.f. the opening line of
  Virgil's _Aeneid_, full quotation: "Wars and a man I sing…" see Virgil. &
  Fagles, R., 2006.
]{#fn66.2 .fn .fn-l}
but of commodities and their passions. It is in this blind struggle that each
commodity, following its passion, in fact [unconsciously
materializes]{.ix data-ix="unconsciousness;materialization"} something beyond
itself: the [globalization]{.ix} of the commodity, and thus, the
[commodification]{.ix} of the globe.[
  "the globalization of the commodity, and thus, the commodification of the
  globe": C.f. Engels, F., Marx, K., 1975. Full quotation: "As the world becomes
  philosophical, philosophy also becomes worldly."
]{#fn66.3 .fn}
Thus, by a _deception of the commodity_ rationale, the
_individual_ commodity wears itself out in battle, while the commodity-form goes
towards its absolute victory in the war of self-realization.[
  "...this blind struggle that each commodity ... self-realization.": C.f.
  Hegel, G., Hoffmeister, J., Nisbet, H. & Forbes, D., 1975. Full quotation:
  "Particular interests contend with one another, and some are destroyed in the
  process. But it is from this very conflict and destruction of particular
  things that the universal emerges. The universal Idea does not itself enter
  into conflict and danger; it remains in the background, untouched and
  unharmed, and sends forth the particular interests of passion to fight and
  wear themselves out in its stead. With what we may call the cunning of reason,
  it sets the passions to work in its service, so that the agents by which it
  gives itself existence must pay the penalty and suffer the loss."
]{#fn66.4 .fn}

### 67

The tension produced between commodities in opposition reduces the
[satisfaction]{.ix} of _using_ these abundant commodities. The individual
consumer exhibits [religious]{.ix data-ix="religion"} fervor for having _as
commodity_, where having is an end in itself.[
  "having as commodity, where having is an end in itself": For example,
  "sneakerheads", those who collect hundreds of pairs of expensive sneakers,
  keeping them boxed and in perfect condition, never actually wearing them. The
  satisfaction comes purely from _having_ them; Apple fans will wait in line for
  the latest Apple iPhone, while the phone in their pocket continues to work
  perfectly, and is nearly indistinguishable to the newer model.
]{#fn67.1 .fn .fn-r}
All forms of media engage in the promotion of waves of fervor for having these
commodities. A new style of fashion emerges from a [film]{.ix}, nightlife
magazines publicizes new night clubs, which in turn launch new products. The
proliferation of trendy gadgets expresses the fact that when the mass of
commodities slides into absurdity, the absurd itself becomes a star
commodity. Gimmicks such as key-chains, for example, which are no longer bought
but are additional gifts that accompany [luxury]{.ix} commodities, or which are
traded back and forth as collectibles in their own right, reflecting a
mysterious surrender to the predominance of the commodity. These commodities are
then manufactured specifically to be [collected]{.ix data-ix="collecting"}.
Collectors prove their position amongst their cohort of the faithful by
showcasing their obedience to the maintenance of accumulation, an accumulation
of commodity _indulgences_—glorious tokens exemplifying the commodities physical
presence among the most faithful.[
  "an accumulation of commodity indulgences-glorious tokens exemplifying the
  commodities physical presence among the faithful": This whole thesis plays on
  associations with classic religious delusions, in this case the "indulgences"
  for forgiveness of sins peddled by the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages and
  the doctrine of the "Real Presence" of Christ in the Eucharist.
]{#fn67.2 .fn}
These commodified people proudly display the proof of their intimacy with the
commodity. The [fetishism of the commodity]{.ix data-ix="commodity fetishism"}
reaches similar moments of fervent exaltation as old religious fetishism, with
its convulsionary raptures and miraculous cures. The only usage that remains
within this relationship is the usage of submission to the commodity on the part
of the faithful.

### 68[This thesis describes the generation of demanded-necessity, where individuals are forced to satisfy their pseudo-needs in order to comply with the norms of society. For example, a luxury watch becomes a necessity for an executive at Goldman-Sachs. Under these conditions, social bonds are as tenuous as having a commodity in common with someone else, and social identities are formed around commodity ownership: "I'm a Subaru enthusiast", "I'm a Nike Air Jordan collector".]{#fn68.0 .fn}{#t68 data-bookmark-label="68"}

Undoubtedly, the [pseudo-needs]{.ix} imposed by contemporary [consumerism]{.ix}
cannot be contrasted against any genuine material need or desire that is not
itself shaped by society and history. The [economy]{.ix} of commodity abundance
represents a total break from the organic development of social needs. The
mechanical accumulation of commodities unleashes a _limitless demand for
[pseudo-necessities]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"}_ which overwhelms all material
needs and [desires]{.ix data-ix="desire"}. The cumulative power of this
autonomous artificiality ends up _falsifying the needs and desires of [directly
lived life]{.ix data-ix="directly lived experience"}_.

### 69

Society presents an image of general unification around blissful
[consumption]{.ix}, yet this is merely _postponing_ consumers awareness of the
actual [contradictions]{.ix data-ix="contradiction"} until their
dissatisfaction[
  "blissful consumption… dissatisfaction": This sequence is institutionalized by
  the system of production as planned obsolescence. Society appears happiest
  when the newest object/product is released. In between, we just wait for the
  new release (occasionally quite literally, some wait in line for the next
  Apple product or Star Wars film.)
]{#fn69.1 .fn}
with the next commodity. Every new [product release]{.ix} presents itself as the
solution to our unified [pseudo-need]{.ix data-ix="pseudo-needs"}: the desire to
resolve the tension between contradictory commodities. But as with parents
giving seemingly unique first names to their children which end up being given
to virtually all individuals of the same age, the [commodities]{.ix} that
promise to solve all consumers dissatisfaction can only be mass-consumed if it
has been mass-produced. This commodity acquires prestige if it is placed at the
center of social life, however briefly, as the ultimate goal of the system of
production. This commodity becomes vulgar as soon as it is brought home,
revealing the poor quality of its [mass production]{.ix}, but luckily, by then
another product will soon be released, again promising to resolve the tension
between commodities. The new release demands a new spectacle to tout its
potential success.

### 70

Every commodity expresses its own inability to
[satisfy]{.ix data-ix="satisfaction"} both real need and
[pseudo-need]{.ix data-ix="satisfaction"} when the commodity is eventually
replaced, proving both the fraud of satisfaction and the inability of the entire
production process to satisfy any needs. The commodity, continually announcing
its excellence in [advertising]{.ix} campaigns, but having failed to satisfy,
results in a new commodity which takes its place—perpetuating and regenerating
the process of spectacular production. [Stalin]{.ix data-ix="Stalin, Joseph"},[
  Stalin: Joseph Stalin (1878-1953), totalitarian leader of the USSR from the
  late 1920s till his death in 1953. Following his death, his successors, who
  had slavishly followed him for decades, undertook a "de-Stalinization"
  campaign, denouncing the "excesses" of his reign.
]{#fn70.1 .fn}
like any other outmoded commodity, is denounced by the very forces that
originally promoted him. Every _lie_ of [advertising]{.ix} is an _admission_ of
their previous lie, revealing the advertiser as someone who knows they produce
lies.  Each downfall of a figure of
[totalitarian]{.ix data-ix="totalitarianism"} power reveals the _deceitful
community_ that unanimously approved of them, which was nothing more than an
assembly of solitudes without [illusion]{.ix data-ix="illusions"}.

### 71

The only constant within the spectacle is change. It is dogmatic only in that it
has no [dogma]{.ix}. Nothing remains constant for the spectacle, it constantly
shifts and changes, and yet it presents itself as a permanent condition that has
no historical events and creates an
[eternal present]{.ix data-ix="perpetual present"}. This instability is the
spectacle's natural condition, but it is completely contrary to its natural
inclination.[
  "Nothing remains constant… it is completely contrary to its natural
  inclination": C.f. Pascal, B. & Ariew, R., 2005. Full quotation: "When we try
  to anchor ourselves to any point, it wavers and leaves us; and if we pursue
  it, it continually eludes our grasp. Nothing stands still for us. This is our
  natural condition, yet it is completely contrary to our inclination."
]{#fn71.1 .fn}


### 72

The spectacle rests on the class divisions of a capitalist mode of production.
This is hidden by the projection of an [image]{.ix data-ix="images"} of unity
within spectacular opposition.[
  "unity within spectacular opposition": The spectacle creates an illusion that
  everyone is involved in the same struggle of Republican vs Democrat, working
  class vs capital; when in reality there are grey areas between the two, as
  well as individuals and groups operating completely outside these false
  dichotomies—and yet these groups operate within a force of unity based upon
  spectacular separation.
]{#fn72.1 .fn}
These class divisions must be maintained to keep the spectacle going.
[Capitalism]{.ix data-ix="capitalism"} motivates producers to create commodities
that promise to break class distinctions, but this causes a finer stratification
between the lower classes. That which connects individuals who are freed from
their local and national limitations is that which
[alienates]{.ix data-ix="alienation"} them. New hyper-rationalities require
continually new [oversimplifications]{.ix data-ix="oversimplification"} of
reality, creating new [irrationalities]{.ix data-ix="irrationality"} of
[hierarchical]{.ix data-ix="hierarchy"} [exploitation]{.ix} and
[oppression]{.ix}. That which creates new abstract powers in society generate
its concrete _lack of freedom_.

:::::
