::::: {.preface .foreword}

## Foreword

In this book, Debord describes and critiques the way we live. The power in these
ideas lies in their ability to question, identify, and name the common
assumptions of the present. Debord develops the concept of _The Spectacle_,
which describes the “gaze” of contemporary society. From its publication just
before, and ultimately influencing the May 1968 revolt in Paris and Occupy Wall
Street, this book continues to transform a wide range of progressive
philosophical and political movements, most notably anti-capitalism,
postmodernism, marxism, and anarchism.

Debord’s work is not an ivory-tower philosophical treatise, it is a cold
analysis of the history and development that leads directly to our present
moment. He critiques various attempts to change society by comparing their
advantages and disadvantages. Ultimately, he makes it apparent that _a way out_
is absurd, and points to only one path forward: a direct democratic movement of
decentralized workers councils, a suggestion made only twice in the entire text.
Most importantly, he emphasizes the importance of validating theory with
practice, and as such, this book is a practical framework for revolutionaries
who _think and do_.

Debord’s text is concise, economical, poetic, provocative, and difficult. As
Michael Hardt & Antonio Negri describe it in their notes to
_Empire_ as "delirious"[
  Quoting Hardt & Negri: "...Debord recognized this spectacle as the destiny of
  triumphant capitalism. Despite their important differences, such authors offer
  us real anticipations of the path of capitalist development." And continuting
  in their notes: "[The Spectacle], which is perhaps the best articulation, in its own
  delirious way, of the contemporary consciousness of the triumph of capital."
  See Hardt, M. & Negri, A., 2000.
]{#fnforeward00 .fn}. His language is pregnant with references to Hegel and
Marx. He uses words and phrases defined in other Situationist texts, and expects
the reader to be familiar with them. This is to be expected, as he demands much
from the reader, and had written for a small audience of “fifty or sixty
people”[
  “fifty or sixty people”: In Debord’s _Comments on the Society of the
  Spectacle_, he describes his audience in the first paragraph thus: “These
  comments are sure to be welcomed by fifty or sixty people; a large number given
  the times in which we live and the gravity of the matters under discussion. But
  then, of course, in some circles I am considered to be an authority. It must
  also be borne in mind that a good half of this interested elite will consist of
  people who devote themselves to maintaining the spectacular system of
  domination, and the other half of people who persist in doing quite the
  opposite. Having, then, to take account of readers who are both attentive and
  diversely influential, I obviously cannot speak with complete freedom. Above
  all, I must take care not to give too much information to just anybody.” See
  Debord, G. & Imrie, M, 1998. Pp 1.
]{#fnforeward.0 .fn} who were well versed in the history
of the western philosophical tradition.

Debord was concerned that these ideas themselves would be recuperated by
capitalism, so he wrote them in such a way as to limit these ideas to a small
and curious minority. His concerns turned out to be warranted, when a few years
later in the early 1970s, the French Socialist Party under François Mitterrand
co-opted the Situationist phrase "Change Life" as his campaign slogan, and
Situationism became the parties unofficial ideology—much to the consternation of
Debord. His ideas were difficult because they were abstract, but the abstraction
meant that it continues to remain relevant (even more so) more than half a
century later.

The very first time I read _The Society of the Spectacle_, I knew I’d need to
re-read it, and possibly need to re-write it in my own words if I wanted to
truly understand it. It was only once I had grasped the gist of the text, that I
was then confronted with the task of understanding the philosophy behind it.
Debord didn’t lay out his ideas using plain language, because his ideas are
austere, terrifying, and extremely dangerous. He is the kind of philosopher
whose ideas and observations of the world are so bleak that one fears these
ideas reaching mass consciousness.

This book isn’t as much a straight translation as it is an elaboration, or
‘remix’ that attempts to reveal more under the text than existed in the original
and its various translations. Debord hid some ideas. This is an attempt to
contextualize and reveal abstract ideas by bringing in references and
annotations in order to add relevance for our current time. I’ve added a few
thoughts and examples to help elucidate difficult concepts. I’ve also tried to
write the grammar in a ‘less French’ style.

Foreign languages are much like distant places, and the act of translation is to
visit these places. We may recognize similarities, but these places are unique
because they have distinct histories. With languages, words not only have
semantic meaning, but attachments to the rich cultural narratives that tell
their histories, and these words are attached to libraries of other texts within
the same cultural milieu. When translating these words, the histories,
narratives, and cultural aspects most relevant to the original text aren’t
always translatable with words alone; words simply aren’t enough to capture the
rich cultural depth that exists _between_ the words. As such, I’ve tried to add
notes where the text made implicit references.
When translating, "[plagiarism is necessary](#ref207.1)", it demands embracing
the author’s ideas, and making them semantically and culturally relevant, and
if done well, it can create an entirely new work, a copy without an original.

This edition isn’t merely a translation of words, but a translation of _time_.
Since Debord wrote this book, society hasn’t changed in kind, but by degree,
everything is exactly the same, only _more_. Advertising is no longer prominent,
but dominant. Facebook and Google aren’t merely the tech companies driving the
economy, but have captured the entire advertising industry, monopolized it, and
built the foundations of a new form of capital on the back of data tracking,
profiling, and machine learning: surveillance capitalism. Urban development has
increased separation and inequality to public goods like education, and
transportation. Technology is now ubiquitous, and we’re all individual agents
glued to separate screens all day, watching personalized content and using apps
that are increasingly mediating nearly all interactions, even the ways we find
love. For Debord, none of this would be new, only _more_.

The book before you is my attempt to participate in the development of his
ideas, at least I’ve tried to ground some of his more abstract ideas upon the
terrain of the recent economic development of surveillance capitalism. The
emergence of commercial social media, particularly, is the confluence of a few
concepts described by Debord: celebrity culture, the perpetual present, and mass
media that work to automate the commodification of personal identity backed by
machine learning.

If you’re looking for a translation that aims to stay faithful to Debord’s
classical French prose, this book is not that. There are editions perfectly
suited for that purpose, I would direct you to the translations by Ken Knabb,
Donald Nichonson-Smith, or Fredy Perlman—all of which I referenced extensively
during the preparation of this book. I’d especially like to point out how
valuable Ken Knabb’s annotated translation has been as a resource for this
edition. His work handed me many of these references, and was instrumental in
pointing me in the right direction for many others. All of these editions can be
found in the bibliography and are well worth reading.

I’ve arranged the notes along the margins rather than as endnotes because
they’re meant to be read alongside the main text. If you’re reading this on a
mobile device, the notes are laid out in-line with the text, and meant to be
read as such. If you are reading this book for the first time, I would suggest
reading it in a particular order, as the first few chapters can be discouraging.
I agree with the preface to Ken Knabb’s 2014 translation, in which he suggests
starting with chapter 4 and 5 because they provide relevant historical and
revolutionary background that helps to contextualize the book. From there read
chapter 7 which covers the development of cities, urban development and social
issues. Then move to chapter 8 which covers culture, the arts, and the history
of artistic movements. Finally, read chapters 1, 2, 3, 6, and 9 which
establishes his concept of _The Spectacle_ and provides a comprehensive critique
of contemporary society. Thus, my suggested chapter reading order is: **4, 5, 7,
8**, _then_ **1, 2, 3, 6, 9**.

My hope is to make Debord’s ideas more accessible, and to show how much more
relevant The Spectacle is today than when it was first written. I am optimistic
that, together, we _can_ make another world possible.

Ron. Adams\
March 2021

:::::
